THE VICAR OF TOURS


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley




                                DEDICATION

                           To David, Sculptor:

   The permanence of the work on which I inscribe your name
   --twice made illustrious in this century--is very problematical;
   whereas you have graven mine in bronze which survives nations
   --if only in their coins. The day may come when numismatists,
   discovering amid the ashes of Paris existences perpetuated by
   you, will wonder at the number of heads crowned in your
   atelier and endeavour to find in them new dynasties.

   To you, this divine privilege; to me, gratitude.

                                                     De Balzac.





THE VICAR OF TOURS




I


Early in the autumn of 1826 the Abbe Birotteau, the principal personage
of this history, was overtaken by a shower of rain as he returned
home from a friend’s house, where he had been passing the evening.
He therefore crossed, as quickly as his corpulence would allow, the
deserted square called “The Cloister,” which lies directly behind
the chancel of the cathedral of Saint-Gatien at Tours.

The Abbe Birotteau, a short man, apoplectic and about sixty years old,
had already suffered several attacks of gout. Among petty miseries the
one he detested most was having his shoes sprinkled and their soles wet.
Notwithstanding the woollen socks in which he enveloped his feet with
the care ecclesiastics take of themselves, dampness soon brought him
gout. Nevertheless, as the pavement of the Cloister was likely to be
dry, and as the abbe had won three francs ten sous in his rubber with
Madame de Listomere, he bore the rain resignedly from the middle of
the place de l’Archeveche, where it began to fall in earnest. Besides,
he was fondling his chimera,—a desire twelve years old, the desire of
a priest, renewed every evening and now, apparently, near accomplishment;
he had wrapped himself so completely in the fur cape of a canon that he
did not feel the weather. Several of the company at Madame de Listomere’s
had almost guaranteed his nomination to the office of canon (then vacant
in the metropolitan Chapter of Saint-Gatien), assuring him that no one
deserved such promotion as he, whose rights, long overlooked, were
indisputable.

Had he lost the rubber, or heard that his rival, the Abbe Poirel, was
named canon, the worthy man would have thought the rain extremely
chilling; he might even have thought ill of life. But it so chanced
that he was in one of those rare moments when inward happiness makes
a man oblivious of discomfort. In hastening his steps he obeyed a more
mechanical impulse, and truth compels us to say that he was thinking of
neither rain nor gout.

In former days there was in the Cloister, on the side towards the
Grand’Rue, a cluster of houses forming a Close belonging to the
cathedral, where several dignitaries of the Chapter lived. After the
confiscation of ecclesiastical property the town had turned the passage
through this close into a narrow street, called the Rue de la Psalette,
by which pedestrians passed from the Cloister to the Grand’Rue. The name
proves that the precentor and his pupils and those connected with the
choir formerly lived there. The other side of the street is occupied
by a single house, the walls overshadowed by the buttresses of
Saint-Gatien, which have their base in the narrow little garden of
the house, leaving it doubtful whether the cathedral was built before
or after this dwelling. An archaeologist examining the arabesques,
the windows, the arch of the door, the exterior, now mellow with age,
would see at once that it had always been part of the magnificent edifice.

An antiquary would even discover, where the narrow street enters the
Cloister, vestiges of an old arcade, once a portico to these ecclesiastical
dwellings, harmonious in style with the general architecture.

The house on the north side of the cathedral was always in the shadow
thrown by that vast edifice, on which time had cast its dingy mantle,
its chill humidity, lichen, mosses, and rank herbs. The darkened
dwelling was wrapped in silence, broken only by bells, the chanting of
offices heard through the windows, and the call of jackdaws in the
belfries. The region is a desert of stones, a solitude with a character
of its own, an arid spot, which could only be inhabited by beings who
had either attained absolute nullity, or were gifted with abnormal
strength of soul. The house had always been occupied by abbes, and it
belonged to an old maid named Mademoiselle Gamard. Though the property
had been bought from the national domain under the Reign of Terror by
Mademoiselle Gamard’s father, no one objected under the Restoration to
her retaining it, because she took priests to board and was devout; it
may be that religious persons gave her credit for the intention of
leaving the property to the Chapter.

The Abbe Birotteau was making his way to this house, where he had lived
for the last two years. His apartment had been (as was now the canonry)
an object of envy and his “hoc erat in votis” for a dozen years. To be
Mademoiselle Gamard’s boarder and to become a canon were the two great
desires of his life; in fact they present accurately the ambition of a
priest, who, considering himself on the highroad to eternity, can wish
for nothing in this world but good lodging, good food, clean garments,
shoes with silver buckles, a sufficiency of things for the needs of the
animal, and a canonry to satisfy self-love, that inexpressible sentiment
which follows us, they say, into the presence of God,—for there are
grades among the saints. But the covetous desire for the apartment
which the Abbe Birotteau was now inhabiting (a harmless desire in the
eyes of worldly people) had been to the abbe nothing less than a passion,
a passion full of obstacles, and, like more guilty passions, full of
hopes, pleasures, and remorse.

The interior arrangements of the house did not allow Mademoiselle Gamard
to take more than two lodgers. For about twelve years before Birotteau
came she had kept two priests: Monsieur l’Abbe Troubert and Monsieur
l’Abbe Chapeloud. The Abbe Troubert still lived. The Abbe Chapeloud was
dead; and Birotteau had stepped into his place.

The late Abbe Chapeloud, in life a canon of Saint-Gatien, had been an
intimate friend of Birotteau. Every time the latter paid a visit he
constantly admired the apartment, the furniture and the library. Out of
this admiration grew the desire to possess these beautiful things. It
had been impossible for Birotteau to stifle this desire; though it often
made him suffer terribly when he reflected that the death of his best
friend could alone satisfy his secret covetousness, which increased as
time went on. The Abbe Chapeloud and his friend Birotteau were not rich.
Both were sons of peasants; their slender savings had been spent in the
mere costs of living during the disastrous years of the Revolution. When
Napoleon restored the Catholic worship the Abbe Chapeloud was appointed
canon of the cathedral and Birotteau was made vicar. Chapeloud then
boarded with Mademoiselle Gamard. When Birotteau first visited the canon,
he admired the rooms but noticed nothing more. The outset of this
concupiscence of chattels was like that of a true passion, which often
begins in a young man's cold admiration for a woman he ends in loving.

The apartment, reached by a stone staircase, faced south. The Abbe
Troubert occupied the ground-floor, and Mademoiselle Gamard the first
floor of the main building, looking on the street. When Chapeloud took
possession his rooms were bare and the ceilings blackened with smoke.
The stone mantelpieces had never been painted. At first, the only
furniture the poor canon could put in was a bed, a table, a few chairs,
and the books he possessed. The apartment was like a beautiful woman in
rags. But two or three years later, an old lady having left Chapeloud
two thousand francs, he spent that sum on an oak bookcase, the relic
of a chateau pulled down by the Bande Noire, whose carving deserved
admiration. He made the purchase less because it was cheap than because
its dimensions exactly fitted the space it was to fill in his gallery.
His savings enabled him to renovate the gallery, then neglected and
shabby. The floor was waxed, the ceiling whitened, the wood-work painted
to resemble oak. A long ebony table and two cabinets by Boulle completed
the decoration and gave the gallery an air full of character. In two
years the liberality of devout persons, and legacies, though small, from
penitents, filled the bookcase, till then half empty. Moreover, Chapeloud’s
uncle, an old Oratorian, had left him his folio collection of the Fathers
of the Church, and several other important works.

Birotteau, more and more surprised by the successive improvements of
the gallery, came by degrees to involuntary envy. He wished he could
possess that apartment, so thoroughly in keeping with ecclesiastical
life. The passion increased day by day. Working sometimes for days
together in this retreat, the vicar appreciated the silence and peace
there. The following year Chapeloud turned a small room into an oratory,
which his pious friends beautified. Still later, another lady gave the
canon a bedroom set, the covering of which she had embroidered under
his eyes without his knowing its destination. The bedroom then dazzled
Birotteau as the gallery had long done. Lastly, about three years before
Chapeloud’s death, he completed his comfort by decorating the salon.
Though the furniture was plainly covered in red Utrecht velvet, it
fascinated Birotteau. From the day he first saw the red damask curtains,
the mahogany furniture, the Aubusson carpet, his envy of Chapeloud’s
apartment became a monomania tucked within his breast. To live there,
to sleep in that silk-curtained bed, to have all Chapeloud’s comforts
about him would be, Birotteau felt, complete happiness; he saw nothing
beyond it. All the envy and ambition which things give birth to in other
men concentrated for Birotteau in the secret longing he felt for that
apartment. When his friend fell ill he visited him out of true affection;
but when he first heard of the illness and sat by his bed reading the
Quotidienne aloud there arose in him, despite himself, a crowd of
thoughts the simple formula of which was always, “If Chapeloud dies I
can have this apartment.” And yet—Birotteau, having an excellent heart,
contracted ideas, and a limited mind—he did not go so far as to think
of means by which to make his friend bequeath to him the library and the
furniture.

The Abbe Chapeloud, an amiable, indulgent egoist, fathomed his friend’s
desires—not difficult to do—and forgave them; which may seem less
easy to a priest; but it must be remembered that the vicar’s friendship
was faithful and he never failed in devotion. The latter paid his debt
of gratitude for a friendship so ingenuously sincere by saying, a few
days before his death, as the vicar sat by him reading: “This time you
will certainly get the apartment. I feel it is all over with me now.”

Accordingly, it was found that Chapeloud had left his library and all
his furniture to his friend Birotteau. The possession of these things,
so keenly desired, and the prospect of being taken to board by Mademoiselle
Gamard, certainly allayed the grief which Birotteau felt at the death
of his friend. He might not have been willing to resuscitate him; but
he mourned him. For several days he was like Gargantua, who, when his
wife died in giving birth to Pantagruel, did not know whether to rejoice
at the birth or grieve at the burial.

Birotteau spent the first days of his mourning verifying the books in his
library, using his furniture, examining his inheritance, saying in a
tone which, unfortunately, was not noted at the time, “Poor Chapeloud!”
His joy and grief so absorbed him that he felt no pain when he found
the office of canon, in which the late Chapeloud had hoped his friend
might succeed him, was given to another. Mademoiselle Gamard, having
cheerfully agreed to take the vicar to board, made him a participator
in all those felicities of material comfort of which the deceased canon
had been wont to boast.

Incalculable they were! According to Chapeloud none of the priests in
Tours, not even the archbishop, had been the object of such minute and
delicate attentions as those bestowed by Mademoiselle Gamard on her two
lodgers. The first words the canon said to his friend when they met for
their walk on the Mail usually referred to the succulent dinner he had
just eaten; and it was rare if during their walks he did not say at least
fourteen times, “That excellent spinster certainly has a vocation for
serving ecclesiastics.”

“Just think,” the canon would say to Birotteau, “that for twelve
consecutive years nothing has ever been amiss,—linen in perfect order,
bands, albs, surplices; I find everything in its place, always in
sufficient quantity, and smelling of orris-root. My furniture is rubbed
and kept so bright that I don’t know when I have seen any dust—did
you ever see a speck of it in my rooms? Then the firewood is so well
selected. The least little things are excellent. In fact, Mademoiselle
Gamard keeps an incessant watch over my wants. I can’t remember having
rung twice for anything—in ten years. That’s what I call living! I never
have to look for a single thing, not even my slippers. Always a good
fire, always a good dinner. Once the bellows annoyed me, the nozzle was
choked up; but I only mentioned it once, and the next day Mademoiselle
gave me a very pretty pair, also those nice tongs you see me mend the
fire with.”

For all answer Birotteau would say, “Smelling of orris-root!” That
phrase always affected him. The canon’s remarks revealed ideal joys to
the poor vicar, whose bands and albs were the plague of his life, for he
was totally devoid of method and often forgot to order his dinner.
Therefore, if he saw Mademoiselle Gamard at Saint-Gatien while saying
mass or taking round the plate, he never failed to give her a kindly
look,—such a look as Saint Teresa might have cast to heaven.

Though the comforts he had longed for thus fell to his share, Birotteau,
like the rest of the world, found it difficult to live without
something to hanker for. Consequently, for the last eighteen months he
had replaced his two satisfied passions by an ardent longing for a
canonry. The title of Canon had become to him very much what a peerage
is to a plebeian minister. The prospect of an appointment, hopes just
held out to him at Madame de Listomere’s, so turned his head that he did
not observe until he reached his own door that he had left his umbrella
behind him. Perhaps, even then, if the rain were not falling in torrents
he might not have missed it, so absorbed was he in the pleasure of
going over and over in his mind what had been said to him at Madame de
Listomere’s,—an old lady with whom he spent every Wednesday evening.

The vicar rang loudly, as if to let the servant know she was not to
keep him waiting. Then he stood close to the door to avoid getting
showered; but the drip from the roof fell on his toes, and the wind
blew gusts of rain into his face. Having calculated the time necessary
for the woman to leave the kitchen and pull the string of the outer
door, he rang again, producing a very significant peal of the bell.

“They can’t be out,” he said to himself, not hearing any movement.

Again he rang, producing a sound that echoed sharply through the house
and was repeated by all the echoes of the cathedral, so that no one
could avoid waking at the remonstrating racket. Accordingly, in a few
moments he heard the wooden shoes of the servant-woman clacking along
the path to the outer door. But even then the discomforts of the gouty
old gentleman were not so quickly over. Instead of pulling the string,
Marianne was obliged to turn the heavy key, pull back all the bolts.

“Why did you let me ring three times in such weather?” said the vicar.

“But, monsieur, don’t you see the door was locked? We have all been
in bed ever so long; it struck a quarter to eleven some time ago.
Mademoiselle must have thought you were in.”

“You saw me go out yourself. Besides, Mademoiselle knows very well I
always go to Madame de Listomere’s on Wednesday evening.”

“I only did as Mademoiselle told me, monsieur.”

These words struck the vicar a blow, which he felt the more because his
late revery had made him completely happy. He said nothing and followed
Marianne towards the kitchen to get his candlestick, which he supposed
had been left there as usual. But instead of entering the kitchen
Marianne went on to his apartments, and there the vicar found his
candlestick on a table close to the door of the red salon, in an
antechamber formed by the landing of the staircase, which Chapeloud had
inclosed with a glass partition. Mute with amazement, he entered his
bedroom hastily, found no fire, and called to Marianne, who had not had
time to get downstairs.

“You have not lighted the fire!” he said.

“Beg pardon, Monsieur l’abbe, I did,” she said; “it must have gone out.”

Birotteau looked again at the hearth, and felt convinced the fire had
been out since morning.

“I must dry my feet,” he said. “Make the fire.”

Marianne obeyed with the haste of a person who wants to get back to
her night’s rest. While looking about for his slippers, which were not
in the middle of his bedside carpet as usual, the abbe took mental notes
of Marianne’s dress, which convinced him she had not got out of bed to
open the door as she said she had. He then recollected that for the last
two weeks he had been deprived of various little attentions which for
eighteen months had made life sweet to him. Now, as the nature of narrow
minds induces them to study trifles, Birotteau plunged suddenly into
deep meditation on these four circumstances, imperceptible in their
meaning to others, but to him indicative of four catastrophes. The
total loss of his happiness was evidently foreshadowed in the neglect
to place his slippers, in Marianne’s falsehood about the fire, in the
removal of his candlestick to the antechamber, and in the evident
intention to keep him waiting in the rain.

When the fire was burning on the hearth, and the lamp lighted, and
Marianne had departed without saying, as usual, “Does Monsieur want
anything more?” the Abbe Birotteau let himself fall gently into the
wide and handsome easy-chair of his late friend; but there was something
mournful in the movement. The good soul was crushed by a presentiment of
coming calamity. His eyes roved to the clock, the bureau, curtains,
chairs, carpets, the stately bed, the basin of holy-water, the crucifix,
to a Virgin by Valentin, a Christ by Lebrun,—in short, to all the
accessories of this cherished room, while his face expressed the anguish
of the tenderest farewell that a lover ever took of his first mistress,
or an old man of his lately planted trees. The vicar had perceived,
somewhat late, the signs of a dumb persecution instituted against him
for the last three months by Mademoiselle Gamard, whose evil intentions
would doubtless have been fathomed sooner by a more intelligent man. Old
maids have a special talent for accentuating the words and actions which
their dislikes suggest. They scratch like cats. They not only wound but
take pleasure in wounding, and in making their victim see that he is
wounded. A man of the world would never have allowed himself to be
scratched twice; the good abbe had taken several blows before he could
be brought to believe in any evil intention.

But when he did perceive it, he set to work, with the inquisitorial
sagacity which priests acquire by directing consciences and burrowing
into the nothings of the confessional, to establish, as though it were
a matter of religious controversy, the following proposition: “Admitting
that Mademoiselle Gamard did not remember it was Madame de Listomere’s
evening, and that Marianne did think I was home, and did really forget
to make my fire, it is impossible, inasmuch as I myself took down my
candlestick this morning, that Mademoiselle Gamard, seeing it in her
salon, could have supposed I had gone to bed. Ergo, Mademoiselle Gamard
intended that I should stand out in the rain, and, by carrying my
candlestick upstairs, she meant to make me understand it. What does it
all mean?” he said aloud, roused by the gravity of these circumstances,
and rising as he spoke to take off his damp clothes, get into his
dressing-gown, and do up his head for the night. Then he returned from
the bed to the fireplace, gesticulating, and launching forth in various
tones the following sentences, all of which ended in a high falsetto
key, like notes of interjection:

“What the deuce have I done to her? Why is she angry with me? Marianne
did _not_ forget my fire! Mademoiselle told her not to light it! I must
be a child if I can’t see, from the tone and manner she has been taking
to me, that I’ve done something to displease her. Nothing like it ever
happened to Chapeloud! I can’t live in the midst of such torments as—At
my age—”

He went to bed hoping the morrow might enlighten him on the causes of
the dislike which threatened to destroy forever the happiness he had
enjoyed two years after wishing for it so long. Alas! the secret reasons
for the inimical feelings Mademoiselle Gamard bore to the luckless abbe
were fated to remain unknown to him,—not that they were difficult to
fathom, but because he lacked the candor by which great souls and
scoundrels look within and judge themselves. A man of genius or a trickster
says to himself, “I did wrong.” Self-interest and native talent are the
only infallible and lucid guides. Now the Abbe Birotteau, whose goodness
amounted to stupidity, whose knowledge was, as it were, plastered on
him by study, who had no experience of the world and its ways, who lived
between the mass and the confessional, chiefly occupied in dealing with
the most trivial matters of conscience as confessor to the schools and
to a few noble souls who appreciated him,—must be regarded as a great
child, to whom most social practices were unknown. And yet, the natural
selfishness of all human beings, reinforced by that peculiar to the
priesthood and the narrow life of the provinces, had insensibly and
unknown to himself developed within him. If any one had probed his spirit
and proved that in numerous petty details he lacked the self-sacrifice
he professed, he would have punished and mortified himself in good faith.
But those offended by such unconscious selfishness pay little heed to
our innocence; what they want is vengeance, and they take it. Thus it
happened that Birotteau, weak brother that he was, underwent the decrees
of that great distributive justice which compels the world to execute
its judgments—called by ninnies “the misfortunes of life.”

There was this difference between Chapeloud and the vicar—one was a
shrewd egoist, the other a simple-minded, clumsy one. When the canon
went to board with Mademoiselle Gamard he knew how to judge her character.
The confessional had taught him to understand the bitterness the sense
of being kept outside the social pale puts into an old maid’s heart;
he therefore judged his treatment of Mademoiselle Gamard wisely. She
was then about thirty-eight, and still retained pretensions which in
well-behaved persons change later into strong self-esteem. The canon saw
that to live comfortably with his landlady he must pay her invariable
attentions and be more infallible than the pope. To compass this he
allowed no points of contact between himself and her except those that
politeness demanded, and those which necessarily exist between two
persons under the same roof. Thus, though he and Troubert took regular
meals, he avoided the family breakfast by having his coffee sent to his
room. He also avoided supper by taking tea in friends’ houses. In this
way he seldom saw his landlady except at dinner; but he always came
down a few minutes in advance. During this courtesy visit he talked to
her, for the twelve years he had lived under her roof, on nearly the
same topics, receiving the same answers: how she had slept, her breakfast,
domestic events, her looks, the weather, incidents of the mass, the
health of such or such a priest. During dinner he invariably paid her
certain indirect compliments: the fish had an excellent flavor; the
seasoning was delicious; Mademoiselle Gamard’s capacities as mistress
were great. He never left her yellow salon after dinner without remarking
that there was no house in Tours where he could get such good coffee.

Thanks to this understanding of Mademoiselle Gamard’s character, and to
the science of existence he practiced for twelve years, no matter of
discussion on household arrangements had ever come up between them.
Chapeloud had noted the spinster’s angles and arranged his avoidance of
her so that he obtained without difficulty all concessions necessary to
his happiness. The result was that Mademoiselle Gamard frequently told
friends that Chapeloud was amiable, easy to live with, and a fine mind.

As to Troubert, she said nothing. Completely involved in her life, like
a satellite in orbit, Troubert was to her a sort of intermediary between
human and canine species; he was classed next to a fat, wheezy pug she
tenderly loved. She ruled Troubert completely, and their interests
intermingled so obviously that many believed Troubert had designs on the
old maid’s property and was binding her to him with infinite patience,
really directing her while seeming to obey without showing the slightest
wish to govern.

When Chapeloud died, the old maid, who desired a lodger with quiet ways,
naturally thought of the vicar. Before the will was known she had
meditated offering his rooms to Troubert, who was not comfortable on
the ground-floor. But when Birotteau, on receiving his legacy, settled
the terms of his board she saw he was so in love with the apartment
that she dared not propose the exchange, and accordingly sacrificed her
sentiments of friendship to self-interest. But to console her favorite
canon she took up the large white Chateau-Renaud bricks and replaced
them with wooden floors laid in “point de Hongrie.” She also rebuilt a
smoky chimney.

For twelve years Birotteau had seen Chapeloud without giving a thought
to the motive of the canon’s circumspection in relations to Mademoiselle
Gamard. When he came to live with that saintly woman he was like a lover
on the point of being made happy. Even if he had not been by nature
purblind of intellect, his eyes were too dazzled by his new happiness
to judge the landlady, or to reflect on the limits he ought to impose
on their daily intercourse. Mademoiselle Gamard, seen from afar and
through the prism of material felicities which the vicar dreamed of,
seemed perfect, a faultless Christian, the woman of the Gospel, adorned
by humble virtues that shed celestial fragrance.

So, with the enthusiasm of one who attains a long-desired object, with
the candor of a child, and the blundering foolishness of an old man
without worldly experience, he fell into Mademoiselle Gamard’s life like
a fly in a spider’s web. The first day he dined and slept at the house
he was detained in the salon after dinner, partly to make the landlady’s
acquaintance, but chiefly by that embarrassment which often assails
timid people and makes them fear seeming impolite by breaking off a
conversation. Consequently he remained the whole evening. Then a friend,
Mademoiselle Salomon de Villenoix, came to see him, and this gave the
landlady the happiness of forming a card-table; so when the vicar went
to bed he felt he had passed an agreeable evening. Knowing Mademoiselle
Gamard and Troubert but slightly, he saw only superficial aspects; few
people bare their defects at once, they generally take on a veneer.

The worthy abbe was thus led to the charming plan of devoting all his
evenings to Mademoiselle Gamard, instead of spending them, as Chapeloud
had done, elsewhere. The old maid had for years been possessed by a
desire which grew stronger day by day. This desire, often formed by
old persons and even by pretty women, had become in Mademoiselle Gamard
as ardent a longing as Birotteau’s for Chapeloud’s apartment; it was
strengthened by pride, egotism, envy, and vanity.

This history is of all time; widen slightly the narrow circle in which
these personages act and you find the co-efficient reasons of events
that take place in higher spheres of social life.

Mademoiselle Gamard spent her evenings by rotation in six or eight
houses. Whether she disliked going out to seek society, or thought at
her age she had a right to expect return, or her pride was wounded at
receiving no company in her house, or her self-love craved those
compliments given to her hostesses,—certain it is her ambition was to
make her salon a centre to which a number of persons should nightly
make their way. One morning as she left Saint-Gatien, after Birotteau
and his friend Mademoiselle Salomon had spent a few evenings with her
and with faithful Troubert, she told certain friends she met at the
church door that those who wished to see her could come once a week to
her house, where she had friends enough to make a card-table; she could
not leave the Abbe Birotteau; Mademoiselle Salomon had not missed a
single evening that week; she was devoted to friends; and—et cetera.
Her speech was the more humbly haughty and softly persuasive because
Mademoiselle Salomon belonged to the most aristocratic society in Tours.
For though Mademoiselle Salomon came to Mademoiselle Gamard’s solely out
of friendship for the vicar, the old maid triumphed in receiving her,
and saw that, thanks to Birotteau, she was on the point of succeeding
in her desire to form a circle as numerous and agreeable as those of
Madame de Listomere and Mademoiselle Merlin de la Blottiere.

But alas! the abbe Birotteau himself caused this cherished hope to
miscarry. Those who, in life, have enjoyed a long desired happiness
will understand the vicar’s joy when he moved into Chapeloud’s vacant
place; they will also faintly grasp Mademoiselle Gamard’s distress at the
overthrow of her plan.

After accepting his happiness in the old maid’s salon for six months,
Birotteau deserted the house of an evening, taking with him Mademoiselle
Salomon. In spite of her efforts the ambitious Gamard had recruited
barely six visitors whose faithful attendance was problematical; and
boston could not be played nightly unless at least four were present.
The defection of her two principal guests obliged her to make apologies
and return to her evening visiting among former friends; for old maids
find their own company so distasteful they prefer the doubtful pleasures
of society.

The cause of this desertion is plain. Although the vicar was one of
those to whom heaven belongs in virtue of “Blessed are the poor in
spirit,” he could not, like some fools, endure the annoyance that other
fools caused him. Persons without minds are like weeds that delight in
good earth; they want to be amused by others, all the more because they
are dull within. The incarnation of ennui to which they are victims,
joined to the need they feel of getting a divorce from themselves,
produces a passion for moving about, for being somewhere else than where
they are, which distinguishes their species—and also that of all beings
devoid of sensitiveness, who have missed their destiny, or suffer by
their own fault.

Without really fathoming Mademoiselle Gamard’s vacuity, the poor abbe
perceived, unfortunately too late, the defects which she shared with all
old maids, and those peculiar to herself. The bad points of others show
out so strongly against the good that they strike our eyes before they
wound us. This moral phenomenon might excuse the tendency we have to
gossip. It is so natural, socially speaking, to laugh at the failings
of others that we ought to forgive the ridicule our own absurdities
excite, and be annoyed only by calumny. But in this instance the vicar’s
eyes never reached the optical range which enables men of the world to
see and evade their neighbours’ rough points. Before he perceived the
landlady’s faults he was forced to undergo the warning which Nature
gives—pain.

Old maids who have never yielded their habits to other lives and
characters have a mania for making others give way to them. In
Mademoiselle Gamard this sentiment had degenerated into despotism, but
a despotism that could only exercise itself on little things. For
instance, the basket of counters placed on the card-table for the Abbe
Birotteau was to stand exactly where she placed it; the abbe annoyed
her by moving it, which he did nearly every evening. How is this
sensitiveness stupidly spent on nothings to be accounted for? what is
the object of it? No one could have told; Mademoiselle Gamard herself
knew no reason. The vicar, though a sheep by nature, did not like, any
more than other sheep, to feel the crook too often, especially when it
bristled with spikes. Not seeking to explain Troubert’s patience,
Birotteau simply withdrew from the happiness Mademoiselle Gamard had
seasoned to his liking—for she regarded happiness as a thing to be made,
like her preserves. But the luckless abbe made the break in a clumsy way,
the natural way of his naive character, and it was not carried out without
much nagging and sharp-shooting, which Birotteau endeavoured to bear as
if he did not feel them.

By the end of the first year the vicar had resumed his former habits;
spending two evenings a week with Madame de Listomere, three with
Mademoiselle Salomon, and the other two with Mademoiselle Merlin. These
ladies belonged to aristocratic circles to which Mademoiselle Gamard was
not admitted. Therefore the abbe’s abandonment was the more insulting,
because it made her feel her want of social value; all choice implies
contempt for the thing rejected.

“Monsieur Birotteau does not find us agreeable enough,” said Troubert
to Mademoiselle Gamard’s friends when she was forced to tell them her
“evenings” must be given up. “He is a man of the world, and a good
liver! He wants fashion, luxury, witty conversation, and the scandals
of the town.”

These words obliged Mademoiselle Gamard to defend herself at Birotteau’s
expense.

“He is not much a man of the world,” she said. “If it had not been for
the Abbe Chapeloud he would never have been received at Madame de
Listomere’s. Oh, what didn’t I lose in losing the Abbe Chapeloud! Such
an amiable man, and so easy to live with! In twelve whole years I never
had the slightest difficulty or disagreement with him.”

Presented thus, the innocent abbe was considered by this bourgeois society,
which secretly hated the aristocratic circles, as a man exacting and
hard to get along with. For a week Mademoiselle Gamard enjoyed being
pitied by friends who, without really thinking one word of what they
said, kept repeating: “How _could_ he have turned against you?—so
kind and gentle as you are!” or, “Console yourself, dear Mademoiselle
Gamard, you are so well known that—” et cetera.

Nevertheless, these friends, enchanted to escape one evening a week
in the Cloister, the darkest and most out of the way corner in Tours,
blessed the poor vicar in their hearts.

Between persons perpetually in each other’s company dislike or love
increases daily; every moment brings reasons to love or hate. The Abbe
Birotteau soon became intolerable to Mademoiselle Gamard. Eighteen months
after she had taken him to board, and at the moment when the worthy man
mistook the silence of hatred for the peacefulness of content, and
applauded himself for having “managed matters so well with the old maid,”
he was really the object of underhand persecution and a vengeance
deliberately planned. The four marked circumstances of the locked door,
the forgotten slippers, the lack of fire, and the removal of the
candlestick, were the first signs that revealed to him a terrible
enmity, the final consequences of which were destined not to strike him
until irreparable.

As he went to bed the vicar worked his brain—quite uselessly—for he
was soon at the end of it—to explain Mademoiselle Gamard’s discourteous
conduct. The fact was that, having acted logically in obeying his own
egotism, it was impossible that he should now perceive his faults
towards his landlady.

Though the great things of life are simple to understand, the littlenesses
require many details to explain. The foregoing events, which may be
called a prologue to this bourgeois drama, in which passions are as
violent as those excited by great interests, required this long
introduction; and it would have been difficult for any faithful
historian to shorten the account of these minute developments.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
II


The next morning, on awaking, Birotteau thought so much of his prospective canonry that he forgot the four circumstances in which he had seen, the night before, such threatening prognostics of a future full of misery. The vicar did not rise without a fire. He rang to let Marianne know he was awake and that she must come; then he remained, as usual, absorbed in somnolent musings. The servant’s custom was to make the fire and gently draw him from his half sleep by the murmured sound of her movements—a sound he loved. Twenty minutes passed and Marianne had not appeared. Birotteau, now half a canon, was about to ring again when he let go the bell-pull, hearing a man’s step on the staircase. In a minute the Abbe Troubert, after discreetly knocking, obeyed Birotteau’s invitation and entered. This visit, which the two abbés usually paid each other once a month, was no surprise. The canon at once exclaimed when he saw that Marianne had not made the fire. He opened the window and called to her harshly, telling her to come at once to the abbé; then, turning to his ecclesiastical brother, he said, “If Mademoiselle knew that you had no fire she would scold Marianne.”

After this he inquired about Birotteau’s health, and asked gently if he had any news that gave him hopes of his canonry. The vicar explained the steps he had taken, and told, naively, the names of persons with whom Madame de Listomere was using her influence, quite unaware that Troubert had never forgiven that lady for not admitting him—the Abbe Troubert, twice proposed by the bishop as vicar-general—to her house.

It would be impossible to find two figures presenting so many contrasts as these two abbés. Troubert, tall and lean, was yellow and bilious, while the vicar was, familiarly, plump. Birotteau’s round ruddy face proclaimed a kindly nature barren of ideas, while Troubert’s long, deeply wrinkled features sometimes took an expression of sarcasm or contempt; but one had to watch him closely to detect those sentiments. The canon’s habitual condition was perfect calm; his eyelids usually lowered over orange-colored eyes that could, however, give clear, piercing glances. Reddish hair added to the gloomy effect of a countenance often obscured by the veil of deep meditation. Many at first thought him absorbed in high ambition; those who knew him better denied it, saying he was stupidly dull under Mademoiselle Gamard’s despotism or worn out by fasting. He seldom spoke and never laughed; when pleasantly moved, a feeble smile would flicker and lose itself in his wrinkles.

Birotteau, on the other hand, was all expansion and frankness; he loved good things and was amused by trifles with the simplicity of a man without spite or malice. Troubert at first sight roused an involuntary fear; the vicar’s presence brought a kind smile. When the tall canon marched with solemn step through Saint-Gatien, his head bowed, his eye stern, respect followed him; that bent face harmonized with the yellowing arches of the cathedral; the folds of his cassock fell in monumental lines. The good vicar, in contrast, perambulated with little gravity; he trotted and ambled and at times seemed to roll himself along. Yet in one point they resembled each other: Troubert’s ambitious air, which made him feared, probably helped keep him down to canon; similarly, Birotteau’s ways marked him out perpetually as vicar and nothing higher.

Yet the Abbe Troubert, now fifty, had, partly by circumspect conduct and apparent lack of ambition, and partly by a saintly life, removed the fears his suspected ability and powerful presence had roused in his superiors. His health had seriously failed during the last year, and it seemed probable he would soon be raised to vicar-general of the archbishopric. His competitors desired the appointment, that their own plans might have time to mature during the few remaining days that a now chronic malady might allow. Far from offering the same hopes to rivals, Birotteau’s triple chin showed to all who wanted his coveted canonry evidence of the soundest health; even his gout seemed to them, by the proverb, an assurance of longevity.

The Abbe Chapeloud, a man of great good sense, whose amiability made him sought in the diocese and among the best society in Tours, had steadily opposed, though secretly and with judgment, the elevation of Troubert. He had adroitly prevented Troubert’s access to the best salons. Nevertheless, during Chapeloud’s lifetime Troubert treated him with great respect and the utmost deference. This submission did not change Chapeloud’s opinion, who said to Birotteau during their last walk together: “Distrust that lean stick of a Troubert,—Sixtus the Fifth reduced to the limits of a bishopric!”

Such was the friend, the abiding guest of Mademoiselle Gamard, who now came, the morning after the old maid had, as it were, declared war against the poor vicar, to pay his brother a visit and show him marks of friendship.

“You must excuse Marianne,” said the canon as the woman entered. “I suppose she went first to my rooms. They are very damp, and I coughed all night. You are most healthily situated here,” he added, looking up at the cornice.

“Yes; I am lodged like a canon,” replied Birotteau.

“And I like a vicar,” said the other, humbly.

“But you will soon be settled in the archbishop’s palace,” said the kindly vicar, who wanted everybody to be happy.

“Yes, or in the cemetery, but God’s will be done!” Troubert raised his eyes to heaven resignedly. “I came,” he said, “to ask you to lend me the ‘Register of Bishops.’ You are the only man in Tours I know who has a copy.”

“Take it out of my library,” replied Birotteau, reminded by the canon’s words of the greatest happiness of his life.

The canon passed into the library and stayed while the vicar dressed. Presently the breakfast bell rang, and the gouty vicar reflected that if it had not been for Troubert’s visit he would have had no fire to dress by. “He’s a kind man,” thought he.

The two priests went downstairs together, each armed with a huge folio which they laid on one of the side tables in the dining-room.

“What’s all that?” asked Mademoiselle Gamard in a sharp voice, addressing Birotteau. “I hope you are not going to litter up my dining-room with your old books!”

“They are books I wanted,” replied the Abbe Troubert. “Monsieur Birotteau has been kind enough to lend them to me.”

“I might have guessed it,” she said with a contemptuous smile. “Monsieur Birotteau doesn’t often read books of that size.”

“How are you, mademoiselle?” said the vicar, in a mellifluous voice.

“Not very well,” she replied shortly. “You woke me up last night out of my first sleep, and I was wakeful for the rest of the night.” Then, sitting down, she added, “Gentlemen, the milk is getting cold.”

Stupefied at being so ill-naturedly received by his landlady, from whom he half expected an apology, and yet alarmed, like all timid people at the prospect of a discussion, especially if it relates to themselves, the poor vicar took his seat in silence. Observing Mademoiselle Gamard’s visible ill-humour, he was goaded into a struggle between reason, which told him not to submit to such discourtesy, and his natural character, which prompted him to avoid a quarrel.

Torn by this inward misery, Birotteau examined attentively the broad green lines painted on the oilcloth which, from custom immemorial, Mademoiselle Gamard left on the table at breakfast-time, without regard to the ragged edges or scars on its surface. The priests sat opposite each other in cane-seated arm-chairs on either side of the square table, the head of which was taken by the landlady, who seemed to dominate the whole from a high chair raised on casters, filled with cushions, standing very near the dining-room stove. This room and the salon were on the ground floor beneath Birotteau’s salon and bedroom.

When the vicar had received his cup of coffee, duly sugared, from Mademoiselle Gamard, he felt chilled to the bone by the grim silence in which he was forced to proceed with the usually gay function of breakfast. He dared not look at Troubert’s dried features nor at the old maid’s threatening visage; he therefore turned, to keep himself in countenance, to the plethoric pug lying on a cushion near the stove—a position that obese victim seldom quitted, having a little plate of dainties at his left and a bowl of fresh water at his right.

“Well, my pretty,” said the vicar, “are you waiting for your coffee?”

The personage thus addressed, one of the most important in the household though the least troublesome since he had ceased to bark and left talking to his mistress, turned his little eyes, sunk in rolls of fat, upon Birotteau. Then he closed them peevishly. To explain the poor vicar’s misery it should be said that, endowed by nature with an empty and sonorous loquacity like the resounding of a football, he asserted without medical reason that speech favored digestion. Mademoiselle Gamard, who believed in this hygienic doctrine, had not refrained, despite their coolness, from talking at meals; though for the last few mornings Birotteau had been forced to strain his mind to find beguiling topics to loosen her tongue. If the narrow limits of this history permitted us to report even one of the conversations which often brought a bitter, sarcastic smile to Troubert’s lips, it would offer a finished picture of provincial Boeotian life. The peculiar revelations of Birotteau and Mademoiselle Gamard on politics, religion, and literature would delight observing minds. It would be highly entertaining to transcribe the reasons on which they doubted Napoleon’s death in 1820, or conjectured the Dauphin living—rescued from the Temple in the hollow of a huge log. Who could help laughing to hear them assert and prove, by reasons evidently their own, that the King of France alone imposed the taxes, that the Chambers were convoked to destroy the clergy, that thirteen hundred thousand persons perished on the scaffold during the Revolution? They frequently discussed the press without either knowing what that modern engine really was. Monsieur Birotteau listened with acceptance to Mademoiselle Gamard when she told him that a man who ate an egg every morning would die in a year and that facts proved it; that a roll of light bread eaten without drinking for several days would cure sciatica; that all the workmen who assisted in pulling down the Abbey Saint-Martin had died in six months; that a certain prefect, under orders from Bonaparte, had tried to damage the towers of Saint-Gatien—with a hundred other absurd tales.

But on this occasion poor Birotteau felt tongue-tied, and he resigned himself to eat without engaging in conversation. After a while, however, the thought crossed him that silence was dangerous for his digestion, and he boldly remarked, “This coffee is excellent.”

That act of courage was wasted. Then, after looking at the scrap of sky visible above the garden between the two buttresses of Saint-Gatien, the vicar again summoned nerve to say, “It will be finer today than yesterday.”

At that remark Mademoiselle Gamard cast her most gracious look on Troubert and immediately turned her eyes with terrible severity on Birotteau, who fortunately by that time was looking at his plate.

No creature of the feminine gender was ever more capable of presenting to the mind the elegiac nature of an old maid than Mademoiselle Sophie Gamard. To describe a being whose character gives momentous interest to the petty events of this drama and to the anterior lives of the actors, it may be useful to summarize the ideas expressed in the being of an Old Maid—remembering always that habits form the soul, and the soul forms the physical presence.

Though all things in society as well as the universe are said to have a purpose, there do exist here below certain beings whose purpose and utility seem inexplicable. Moral philosophy and political economy condemn the individual who consumes without producing; who fills a place on earth but does not shed upon it either good or evil—for evil is sometimes good the meaning of which is not at once made manifest. It is seldom that old maids of their own motion enter the ranks of these unproductive beings. Now, if the consciousness of work done gives the workers a sense of satisfaction that helps them support life, the certainty of being a useless burden must produce a contrary effect and fill such fruitless beings with the same contempt for themselves which they inspire in others. This harsh social reprobation is one cause that helps fill old maids’ souls with the distress seen in their faces. Prejudice, in which there is truth, casts, throughout the world but especially in France, a great stigma on the woman with whom no man has been willing to share life’s blessings or ills. Now, all unmarried women reach a period when the world, right or wrong, condemns them for this rejection. If they are ugly, the goodness of character ought to have compensated their imperfections; if handsome, that argues some serious cause. It is impossible to say which class is more deserving of rejection. If, on the other hand, their celibacy is deliberate, proceeding from a desire for independence, neither men nor mothers will forgive their disloyalty to womanly devotion, evidenced in their refusal to feed those passions which render their sex affecting. To renounce the pangs of womanhood is to abjure its poetry and cease to merit the consolations to which mothers have inalienable rights.

Moreover, generous sentiments and exquisite qualities of a woman will not develop unless by constant exercise. By remaining unmarried, a woman becomes void of meaning; selfish and cold, she creates repulsion. This implacable judgment of the world is too just to leave old maids ignorant of its causes. Such ideas shoot up in their hearts as naturally as the effects of their saddened lives appear on their features. Consequently they wither, because the constant expression of happiness that blooms on other women’s faces and gives grace to their movements has never existed for them. They grow sharp and peevish because all human beings who miss their vocation are unhappy; they suffer, and suffering gives birth to bitterness. In fact, before an old maid blames herself for her isolation she blames others, and there is but one step between reproach and the desire for revenge.

But more than this, the ill grace and want of charm noticeable in these women result from their lives. Never having felt a desire to please, elegance and the refinements of taste are foreign to them. They see only themselves. This instinct brings them, unconsciously, to choose what is most convenient for themselves at the sacrifice of what might please others. Without accounting to their own minds for the difference between themselves and other women, they end by feeling that difference and suffering under it. Jealousy is indelible in the female breast. An old maid’s soul is jealous and yet void; for she knows but one side—the miserable side—of the only passion men will allow to women. Thus thwarted in all hopes, forced to deny the natural development of their natures, old maids endure an inward torment to which they never grow accustomed. It is hard at any age, especially for a woman, to see repulsion on others’ faces, when her true destiny is to move hearts to grace and love. One result of this inward trouble is that an old maid’s glance is always oblique, less from modesty than from fear and shame. Such beings never forgive society for their false position because they never forgive themselves for it.

Now it is impossible for a woman perpetually at war with herself and living in contradiction to her true life to leave others in peace or refrain from envying their happiness. The whole range of these sad truths could be read in the dulled gray eyes of Mademoiselle Gamard; the dark circles around them told of inward conflicts. All the wrinkles on her face were in straight lines. The structure of her forehead and cheeks was rigid and prominent. She allowed, with apparent indifference, certain scattered hairs, once brown, to grow upon her chin. Her thin lips scarcely covered teeth that were too long, though still quite white. Her complexion was dark, and her hair, originally black, had turned gray from frightful headaches—a misfortune that obliged her to wear a false front. Not knowing how to put it on to conceal the junction, there were often little gaps between the border of her cap and the black string fastening the semi-wig. Her gown, silk in summer, merino in winter, always brown, was invariably rather tight for her angular figure and thin arms. Her collar, limp and bent, exposed too much the red skin of a neck ribbed like an oak-leaf in winter seen in the light. Her origin explains to some extent these defects. She was the daughter of a wood-merchant, a peasant who had risen from the ranks. She might have been plump at eighteen, but no trace remained of the fair complexion and pretty color she boasted. The tones of her flesh had taken pallid tints often seen in “devotes.” Her aquiline nose chiefly proclaimed the despotism of her nature, and the flat forehead the narrowness of her mind. Her movements had an odd abruptness that precluded grace; the mere motion with which she twitched her handkerchief from her bag and blew her nose with a loud noise would have shown her character and habits. Being rather tall she held herself erect, and justified the remark of a naturalist who once explained old maids’ peculiar gait by declaring their joints were consolidating. When she walked her movements were not equally distributed over her person, as in other women, producing the graceful undulations so attractive. She moved, so to speak, in a single block, seeming to advance at each step like the statue of the Commendatore. When in good humour she was apt to tell of chances she had had to marry, and of her fortunate discovery in time of her lovers’ want of means—proving, unconsciously, that her worldly judgment was better than her heart.

This typical figure of the genus Old Maid was well framed by the grotesque designs representing Turkish landscapes on varnished paper that decorated the dining-room. Mademoiselle Gamard usually sat in this room, which boasted two pier tables and a barometer. Before each abbé’s chair was a little cushion covered with faded worsted work. The salon in which she received company was worthy of its mistress. It went by the name “the yellow salon.” The curtains were yellow, the furniture and walls yellow; on the mantelpiece, surmounted by a mirror in a gilt frame, the candlesticks and a clock all of crystal struck the eye with sharp brilliancy. As to Mademoiselle Gamard’s private apartment, no one had ever been permitted to look into it. Conjecture alone suggested it was full of odds and ends, worn-out furniture, and bits and pieces dear to the hearts of all old maids.

Such was the woman destined to exert a vast influence on the last years of Abbe Birotteau.

For want of exercising in nature’s way the activity bestowed upon women, and yet impelled to spend it, Mademoiselle Gamard had acquired the habit of using it in petty intrigues, provincial cabals, and self-seeking schemes which occupy sooner or later the lives of all old maids. Birotteau, unhappily, had developed in Sophie Gamard the only sentiments it was possible for that poor creature to feel—hatred; a passion hitherto latent under provincial calm but now to become more intense because spent on petty things in a narrow sphere. Birotteau was one of those beings predestined to suffer because, being unable to see things, they cannot avoid them; to them the worst happens.

“Yes, it will be a fine day,” replied the canon after a pause, apparently issuing from reverie and wishing to conform to politeness.

Birotteau, frightened at the length of time that had elapsed between question and answer—for he had, for the first time, taken his coffee without speaking—left the dining-room where his heart was squeezed as if in a vise. Feeling the coffee heavy on his stomach, he walked in a sad mood among the narrow, box-edged garden paths that outlined a star. As he turned after the first round, he saw Mademoiselle Gamard and Troubert standing stock-still and silent on the threshold—he with arms folded and motionless like a statue on a tomb; she leaning against the blind door. Both seemed to be gazing at him and counting his steps. Nothing is so embarrassing to a timid creature as to feel itself the object of close examination, and if that is made by eyes of hatred, the suffering becomes intolerable martyrdom.

Presently Birotteau fancied he was preventing them from walking in the narrow path. That idea, inspired equally by fear and kindness, became so strong that he left the garden and went to the church, thinking no longer of his canonry, so absorbed was he by the disheartening tyranny of the old maid. Luckily he found much to do at Saint-Gatien—several funerals, a marriage, and two baptisms. Thus employed he forgot his griefs. When his stomach told him dinner was ready he drew out his watch and saw, with alarm, that it was some minutes after four. Being aware of Mademoiselle Gamard’s punctuality, he hurried back.

He saw at once on passing the kitchen door that the first course had been removed. When he reached the dining-room the old maid said, with a tone mixing sour rebuke and joy at being able to blame him:—

“It is half-past four, Monsieur Birotteau. You know we are not to wait for you.”

The vicar looked at the clock and saw at once, by the way the gauze protecting it had been moved, that his landlady had opened the face and set the hands ahead of the cathedral clock. He could make no remark. Had he expressed his suspicion it would only have caused one of those fierce and eloquent expositions to which Mademoiselle Gamard, like other women of her class, knew how to give vent in particular cases. The thousand and one annoyances a servant will sometimes make her master bear, or a woman her husband, were instinctively divined by Mademoiselle Gamard and used upon Birotteau. The way she delighted in plotting against the poor vicar’s domestic comfort bore marks of a profoundly malignant genius. Yet she so managed that she was never, as far as eye could see, in the wrong.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
III

Eight days after the date on which this history began, the new
arrangements of the household and the relations that grew up between
the Abbe Birotteau and Mademoiselle Gamard revealed to the former the
existence of a plot that had been hatching for the last six months.

As long as the old maid exercised her vengeance in an underhand way, and
the vicar was able to shut his eyes to it and refuse to believe in her
malevolent intentions, the moral effect upon him was slight. But since
the affair of the candlestick and the altered clock, Birotteau would
doubt no longer that he was under an eye of hatred turned fully upon
him. From that moment he fell into despair, seeing everywhere the
skinny, clawlike fingers of Mademoiselle Gamard ready to hook into his
heart. The old maid, happy in a sentiment as fruitful of emotions as
that of vengeance, enjoyed circling and swooping above the vicar as a
bird of prey hovers and swoops over a field-mouse before pouncing down
and devouring it. She had long since laid a plan which the poor
dumbfounded priest was quite incapable of imagining, and which she now
proceeded to unfold with that genius for little things often shown by
solitary persons, whose souls, incapable of feeling the grandeur of true
piety, fling themselves into the details of outward devotion.

The petty nature of his troubles prevented Birotteau, always effusive
and liking to be pitied and consoled, from enjoying the soothing
pleasure of taking his friends into his confidence,—a last but cruel
aggravation of his misery. The little amount of tact which he derived
from his timidity made him fear to seem ridiculous in concerning himself
with such pettiness. And yet those petty things made up the sum of his
existence,—that cherished existence, full of busyness about nothings,
and of nothingness in its business; a colorless barren life in which
strong feelings were misfortunes, and the absence of emotion happiness.
The poor priest’s paradise was changed, in a moment, into hell. His
sufferings became intolerable. The terror he felt at the prospect of
a discussion with Mademoiselle Gamard increased day by day; the secret
distress which blighted his life began to injure his health. One
morning, as he put on his mottled blue stockings, he noticed a marked
diminution in the circumference of his calves. Horrified by so cruel and
undeniable a symptom, he resolved to make an effort and appeal to
the Abbe Troubert, requesting him to intervene, officially, between
Mademoiselle Gamard and himself.

When he found himself in presence of the imposing canon, who, in order
to receive his visitor in a bare and cheerless room, had hastily quitted
a study full of papers, where he worked incessantly and admitted no one,
the vicar felt half ashamed at speaking of Mademoiselle Gamard’s
provocations to a man who appeared so gravely occupied. But after going
through the agony of the mental deliberations that humble, undecided,
and feeble persons endure about things of even no importance, he
decided, not without much swelling and beating of the heart, to explain
his position to the Abbe Troubert.

The canon listened in a cold, grave manner, trying, but in vain, to
repress an occasional smile which to more intelligent eyes than those of
the vicar might have betrayed the emotions of a secret satisfaction. A
flame seemed to dart from his eyelids when Birotteau pictured with the
eloquence of genuine feeling the constant bitterness he was made to
swallow; but Troubert laid his hand above those lids with a gesture very
common to thinkers, maintaining the dignified demeanor usual with him.
When the vicar had ceased to speak he would indeed have been puzzled had
he sought on Troubert’s face, marbled with yellow blotches even more
yellow than his usually bilious skin, for any trace of the feelings he
must have excited in that mysterious priest.

After a moment’s silence the canon made one of those answers which
require long study before their meaning can be thoroughly perceived,
though later they prove to reflecting persons the astonishing depths
of his spirit and the power of his mind. He simply crushed Birotteau by
telling him that “these things amazed him all the more because he should
never have suspected their existence were it not for his brother’s
confession. He attributed such stupidity on his part to the gravity of
his occupations, his labors, the absorption in which his mind was held
by certain elevated thoughts which prevented his taking due notice
of the petty details of life.” He made the vicar observe, but without
appearing to censure the conduct of a man whose age and connections
deserved all respect, that “in former days, recluses thought little
about their food and lodging in the solitude of their retreats, where
they were lost in holy contemplations,” and that “in our days, priests
can make a retreat for themselves in the solitude of their own hearts.”
Then, reverting to Birotteau’s affairs, he added that “such
disagreements were a novelty to him. For twelve years nothing of the
kind had occurred between Mademoiselle Gamard and the venerable Abbe
Chapeloud. As for himself, he might, no doubt, be an arbitrator between
the vicar and their landlady, because his friendship for that person
had never gone beyond the limits imposed by the Church on her faithful
servants; but if so, justice demanded that he should hear both sides.
He certainly saw no change in Mademoiselle Gamard, who seemed to him the
same as ever; he had always submitted to a few of her caprices, knowing
that the excellent woman was kindness and gentleness itself; the
slight fluctuations of her temper should be attributed, he thought, to
sufferings caused by a pulmonary affection, of which she said little,
resigning herself to bear them in a truly Christian spirit.” He ended by
assuring the vicar that “if he stayed a few years longer in Mademoiselle
Gamard’s house he would learn to understand her better and acknowledge
the real value of her excellent nature.”

Birotteau left the room confounded. In the direful necessity of
consulting no one, he now judged Mademoiselle Gamard as he would
himself, and the poor man fancied that if he left her house for a few
days he might extinguish, for want of fuel, the dislike the old maid
felt for him. He accordingly resolved to spend, as he formerly did,
a week or so at a country-house where Madame de Listomere passed her
autumns, a season when the sky is usually pure and tender in Touraine.
Poor man! in so doing he did the thing most desired by his terrible
enemy, whose plans could only have been brought to nought by the
resistant patience of a monk. But the vicar, unable to divine them,
not understanding even his own affairs, was doomed to fall, like a lamb,
at the butcher’s first blow.

Madame de Listomere’s country-place, situated on the embankment between
Tours and the heights of Saint-Georges, with a southern exposure and
surrounded by rocks, combined the charms of the country with the
pleasures of the town. It took but ten minutes from the bridge of Tours
to reach the house, which was called the “Alouette,”—a great advantage
in a region where no one will put himself out for anything whatsoever,
not even to seek a pleasure.

The Abbe Birotteau had been about ten days at the Alouette, when, one
morning while he was breakfasting, the porter came to say that Monsieur
Caron desired to speak with him. Monsieur Caron was Mademoiselle
Gamard’s lawyer and had charge of her affairs. Birotteau, not
remembering this and unable to think of any matter of litigation
between himself and others, left the table to see the lawyer in a state
of great agitation. He found him modestly seated on the balustrade of a
terrace.

“Your intention of ceasing to reside in Mademoiselle Gamard’s house
being made evident—” began the man of business.

“Eh! monsieur,” cried the Abbe Birotteau, interrupting him, “I have not
the slightest intention of leaving it.”

“Nevertheless, monsieur,” replied the lawyer, “you must have had some
agreement in the matter with Mademoiselle, for she has sent me to
ask how long you intend to remain in the country. The event of a long
absence was not foreseen in the agreement, and may lead to a contest.
Now, Mademoiselle Gamard understanding that your board—”

“Monsieur,” said Birotteau, amazed, and again interrupting the lawyer,
“I did not suppose it necessary to employ, as it were, legal means to—”

“Mademoiselle Gamard, who is anxious to avoid all dispute,” said
Monsieur Caron, “has sent me to come to an understanding with you.”

“Well, if you will have the goodness to return to-morrow,” said the
abbe, “I shall then have taken advice in the matter.”

The quill-driver withdrew. The poor vicar, frightened at the persistence
with which Mademoiselle Gamard pursued him, returned to the dining-room
with his face so convulsed that everybody cried out when they saw him:
“What is the matter, Monsieur Birotteau?”

The abbe, in despair, sat down without a word, so crushed was he by the
vague presence of approaching disaster. But after breakfast, when his
friends gathered round him before a comfortable fire, Birotteau naively
related the history of his troubles. His hearers, who were beginning to
weary of the monotony of a country-house, were keenly interested in a
plot so thoroughly in keeping with the life of the provinces. They all
took sides with the abbe against the old maid.

“Don’t you see, my dear friend,” said Madame de Listomere, “that the
Abbe Troubert wants your apartment?”

Here the historian ought to sketch this lady; but it occurs to him that
even those who are ignorant of Sterne’s system of “cognomology,” cannot
pronounce the three words “Madame de Listomere” without picturing her
to themselves as noble and dignified, softening the sternness of rigid
devotion by the gracious elegance and the courteous manners of the old
monarchical regime; kind, but a little stiff; slightly nasal in voice;
allowing herself the perusal of “La Nouvelle Heloise”; and still wearing
her own hair.

“The Abbe Birotteau must not yield to that old vixen,” cried Monsieur de
Listomere, a lieutenant in the navy who was spending a furlough with
his aunt. “If the vicar has pluck and will follow my suggestions he will
soon recover his tranquillity.”

All present began to analyze the conduct of Mademoiselle Gamard with the
keen perceptions which characterize provincials, to whom no one can deny
the talent of knowing how to lay bare the most secret motives of human
actions.

“You don’t see the whole thing yet,” said an old landowner who knew the
region well. “There is something serious behind all this which I can’t
yet make out. The Abbe Troubert is too deep to be fathomed at once. Our
dear Birotteau is at the beginning of his troubles. Besides, would he
be left in peace and comfort even if he did give up his lodging to
Troubert? I doubt it. If Caron came here to tell you that you intended
to leave Mademoiselle Gamard,” he added, turning to the bewildered
priest, “no doubt Mademoiselle Gamard’s intention is to turn you out.
Therefore you will have to go, whether you like it or not. Her sort of
people play a sure game, they risk nothing.”

This old gentleman, Monsieur de Bourbonne, could sum up and estimate
provincial ideas as correctly as Voltaire summarized the spirit of
his times. He was thin and tall, and chose to exhibit in the matter of
clothes the quiet indifference of a landowner whose territorial value is
quoted in the department. His face, tanned by the Touraine sun, was less
intellectual than shrewd. Accustomed to weigh his words and measure
his actions, he concealed a profound vigilance behind a misleading
appearance of simplicity. A very slight observation of him sufficed to
show that, like a Norman peasant, he invariably held the upper hand
in business matters. He was an authority on wine-making, the leading
science of Touraine. He had managed to extend the meadow lands of his
domain by taking in part of the alluvial soil of the Loire without
getting into difficulties with the State. This clever proceeding gave
him the reputation of a man of talent. If Monsieur de Bourbonne’s
conversation pleased you and you were to ask who he was of a Tourainean,
“Ho! a sly old fox!” would be the answer of those who were envious
of him—and they were many. In Touraine, as in many provinces,
jealousy is the root of language.

Monsieur de Bourbonne’s remark occasioned a momentary silence, during
which the persons who composed the little party seemed to be reflecting.
Meanwhile Mademoiselle Salomon de Villenoix was announced. She came from
Tours in the hope of being useful to the poor abbe, and the news she
brought completely changed the aspect of the affair. As she entered,
every one except Monsieur de Bourbonne was urging Birotteau to hold his
own against Troubert and Gamard, under the auspices of the aristocratic
society of the place, which would certainly stand by him.

“The vicar-general, to whom the appointments to office are entrusted, is
very ill,” said Mademoiselle Salomon, “and the archbishop has delegated
his powers to the Abbe Troubert provisionally. The canonry will, of
course, depend wholly upon him. Now last evening, at Mademoiselle de la
Blottiere’s the Abbe Poirel talked about the annoyances which the Abbe
Birotteau had inflicted on Mademoiselle Gamard, as though he were trying
to cast all the blame on our good abbe. ‘The Abbe Birotteau,’ he said,
‘is a man to whom the Abbe Chapeloud was absolutely necessary, and
since the death of that venerable man, he has shown’—and then came
suggestions, calumnies! you understand?”

“Troubert will be made vicar-general,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne,
sententiously.

“Come!” cried Madame de Listomere, turning to Birotteau, “which do
you prefer, to be made a canon, or continue to live with Mademoiselle
Gamard?”

“To be a canon!” cried the whole company.

“Well, then,” resumed Madame de Listomere, “you must let the Abbe
Troubert and Mademoiselle Gamard have things their own way. By sending
Caron here they mean to let you know indirectly that if you consent
to leave the house you shall be made canon,—one good turn deserves
another.”

Every one present applauded Madame de Listomere’s sagacity, except her
nephew the Baron de Listomere, who remarked in a comic tone to Monsieur
de Bourbonne, “I would like to have seen a fight between the Gamard and
the Birotteau.”

But, unhappily for the vicar, forces were not equal between these
persons of the best society and the old maid supported by the Abbe
Troubert. The time soon came when the struggle developed openly, went
on increasing, and finally assumed immense proportions. By the advice
of Madame de Listomere and most of her friends, who were now eagerly
enlisted in a matter which threw such excitement into their vapid
provincial lives, a servant was sent to bring back Monsieur Caron.
The lawyer returned with surprising celerity, which alarmed no one but
Monsieur de Bourbonne.

“Let us postpone all decision until we are better informed,” was the
advice of that Fabius in a dressing-gown, whose prudent reflections
revealed to him the meaning of these moves on the Tourainean
chess-board. He tried to enlighten Birotteau on the dangers of his
position; but the wisdom of the old “sly-boots” did not serve the
passions of the moment, and he obtained but little attention.

The conference between the lawyer and Birotteau was short. The vicar
came back quite terrified.

“He wants me to sign a paper stating my relinquishment of domicile.”

“That’s formidable language!” said the naval lieutenant.

“What does it mean?” asked Madame de Listomere.

“Merely that the abbe must declare in writing his intention of leaving
Mademoiselle Gamard’s house,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne, taking a pinch
of snuff.

“Is that all?” said Madame de Listomere. “Then sign it at once,” she
added, turning to Birotteau. “If you positively decide to leave her
house, there can be no harm in declaring that such is your will.”

Birotteau’s will!

“That is true,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne, closing his snuff-box with a
gesture the significance of which it is impossible to render, for it
was a language in itself. “But writing is always dangerous,” he added,
putting his snuff-box on the mantelpiece with an air and manner that
alarmed the vicar.

Birotteau was so bewildered by the upsetting of all his ideas, by the
rapidity of events which found him defenceless, by the ease with which
his friends were settling the most cherished matters of his solitary
life, that he remained silent and motionless as if moonstruck, thinking
of nothing, though listening and striving to understand the meaning of
the rapid sentences the assembled company addressed to him. He took the
paper Monsieur Caron had given him and read it, as if he were giving
his mind to the lawyer’s document, but the act was merely mechanical.
He signed the paper, by which he declared that he left Mademoiselle
Gamard’s house of his own wish and will, and that he had been fed and
lodged while there according to the terms originally agreed upon. When
the vicar had signed the document, Monsieur Caron took it and asked
where his client was to send the things left by the abbe in her house
and belonging to him. Birotteau replied that they could be sent to
Madame de Listomere’s,—that lady making him a sign that she would
receive him, never doubting that he would soon be a canon. Monsieur de
Bourbonne asked to see the paper, the deed of relinquishment, which the
abbe had just signed. Monsieur Caron gave it to him.

“How is this?” he said to the vicar after reading it. “It appears that
written documents already exist between you and Mademoiselle Gamard.
Where are they? and what do they stipulate?”

“The deed is in my library,” replied Birotteau.

“Do you know the tenor of it?” said Monsieur de Bourbonne to the lawyer.

“No, monsieur,” said Caron, stretching out his hand to regain the fatal
document.

“Ha!” thought the old man; “you know, my good friend, what that deed
contains, but you are not paid to tell us,” and he returned the paper to
the lawyer.

“Where can I put my things?” cried Birotteau; “my books, my beautiful
book-shelves, and pictures, my red furniture, and all my treasures?”

The helpless despair of the poor man thus torn up as it were by the
roots was so artless, it showed so plainly the purity of his ways
and his ignorance of the things of life, that Madame de Listomere and
Mademoiselle de Salomon talked to him and consoled him in the tone which
mothers take when they promise a plaything to their children.

“Don’t fret about such trifles,” they said. “We will find you some place
less cold and dismal than Mademoiselle Gamard’s gloomy house. If we
can’t find anything you like, one or other of us will take you to live
with us. Come, let’s play a game of backgammon. To-morrow you can go and
see the Abbe Troubert and ask him to push your claims to the canonry,
and you’ll see how cordially he will receive you.”

Feeble folk are as easily reassured as they are frightened. So the poor
abbe, dazzled at the prospect of living with Madame de Listomere, forgot
the destruction, now completed, of the happiness he had so long desired,
and so delightfully enjoyed. But at night before going to sleep, the
distress of a man to whom the fuss of moving and the breaking up of all
his habits was like the end of the world, came upon him, and he racked
his brains to imagine how he could ever find such a good place for his
book-case as the gallery in the old maid’s house. Fancying he saw his
books scattered about, his furniture defaced, his regular life turned
topsy-turvy, he asked himself for the thousandth time why the first year
spent in Mademoiselle Gamard’s house had been so sweet, the second
so cruel. His troubles were a pit in which his reason floundered. The
canonry seemed to him small compensation for so much misery, and
he compared his life to a stocking in which a single dropped stitch
resulted in destroying the whole fabric. Mademoiselle Salomon remained
to him. But, alas, in losing his old illusions the poor priest dared not
trust in any later friendship.

In the “citta dolente” of spinsterhood we often meet, especially in
France, women whose lives are a sacrifice nobly and daily offered
to noble sentiments. Some remain proudly faithful to a heart which death
tore from them; martyrs of love, they learn the secrets of womanhood
only through their souls. Others obey some family pride (which in our
days, and to our shame, decreases steadily); these devote themselves to
the welfare of a brother, or to orphan nephews; they are mothers while
remaining virgins. Such old maids attain to the highest heroism of their
sex by consecrating all feminine feelings to the help of sorrow.
They idealize womanhood by renouncing the rewards of woman’s destiny,
accepting its pains. They live surrounded by the splendour of their
devotion, and men respectfully bow the head before their faded features.
Mademoiselle de Sombreuil was neither wife nor maid; she was and ever
will be a living poem. Mademoiselle Salomon de Villenoix belonged to
the race of these heroic beings. Her devotion was religiously sublime,
inasmuch as it won her no glory after being, for years, a daily agony.
Beautiful and young, she loved and was beloved; her lover lost his
reason. For five years she gave herself, with love’s devotion, to the
mere mechanical well-being of that unhappy man, whose madness she so
penetrated that she never believed him mad. She was simple in manner,
frank in speech, and her pallid face was not lacking in strength and
character, though its features were regular. She never spoke of the
events of her life. But at times a sudden quiver passed over her as she
listened to the story of some sad or dreadful incident, thus betraying
the emotions that great sufferings had developed within her. She had
come to live at Tours after losing the companion of her life; but she
was not appreciated there at her true value and was thought to be
merely an amiable woman. She did much good, and attached herself,
by preference, to feeble beings. For that reason the poor vicar had
naturally inspired her with a deep interest.

Mademoiselle de Villenoix, who returned to Tours the next morning, took
Birotteau with her and set him down on the quay of the cathedral leaving
him to make his own way to the Cloister, where he was bent on going,
to save at least the canonry and to superintend the removal of his
furniture. He rang, not without violent palpitations of the heart, at
the door of the house whither, for fourteen years, he had come daily,
and where he had lived blissfully, and from which he was now exiled
forever, after dreaming that he should die there in peace like his
friend Chapeloud. Marianne was surprised at the vicar’s visit. He told
her that he had come to see the Abbe Troubert, and turned towards the
ground-floor apartment where the canon lived; but Marianne called to
him:—

“Not there, monsieur le vicaire; the Abbe Troubert is in your old
apartment.”

These words gave the vicar a frightful shock. He was forced to
comprehend both Troubert’s character and the depths of the revenge so
slowly brought about when he found the canon settled in Chapeloud’s
library, seated in Chapeloud’s handsome armchair, sleeping, no doubt, in
Chapeloud’s bed, and disinheriting at last the friend of Chapeloud, the
man who, for so many years, had confined him to Mademoiselle Gamard’s
house, by preventing his advancement in the church, and closing the
best salons in Tours against him. By what magic wand had the present
transformation taken place? Surely these things belonged to Birotteau?
And yet, observing the sardonic air with which Troubert glanced at that
bookcase, the poor abbe knew that the future vicar-general felt certain
of possessing the spoils of those he had so bitterly hated,—Chapeloud
as an enemy, and Birotteau, in and through whom Chapeloud still thwarted
him. Ideas rose in the heart of the poor man at the sight, and plunged
him into a sort of vision. He stood motionless, as though fascinated by
Troubert’s eyes which fixed themselves upon him.

“I do not suppose, monsieur,” said Birotteau at last, “that you intend
to deprive me of the things that belong to me. Mademoiselle may have
been impatient to give you better lodgings, but she ought to have
been sufficiently just to give me time to pack my books and remove my
furniture.”

“Monsieur,” said the Abbe Troubert, coldly, not permitting any sign of
emotion to appear on his face, “Mademoiselle Gamard told me yesterday
of your departure, the cause of which is still unknown to me. If she
installed me here at once, it was from necessity. The Abbe Poirel has
taken my apartment. I do not know if the furniture and things that are
in these rooms belong to you or to Mademoiselle; but if they are
yours, you know her scrupulous honesty; the sanctity of her life is the
guarantee of her rectitude. As for me, you are well aware of my simple
modes of living. I have slept for fifteen years in a bare room without
complaining of the dampness—which eventually will have caused my
death. Nevertheless, if you wish to return to this apartment I will cede
it to you willingly.”

After hearing these terrible words, Birotteau forgot the canonry and ran
downstairs as quickly as a young man to find Mademoiselle Gamard. He
met her at the foot of the staircase, on the broad, tiled landing which
united the two wings of the house.

“Mademoiselle,” he said, bowing to her without paying any attention
to the bitter and derisive smile that was on her lips, nor to the
extraordinary flame in her eyes which made them lucent as a tiger’s, “I
cannot understand how it is that you have not waited until I removed my
furniture before—”

“What!” she said, interrupting him, “is it possible that your things
have not been left at Madame de Listomere’s?”

“But my furniture?”

“Haven’t you read your deed?” said the old maid, in a tone which would
have to be rendered in music before the shades of meaning that hatred is
able to put into the accent of every word could be fully shown.

Mademoiselle Gamard seemed to rise in stature, her eyes shone, her face
expanded, her whole person quivered with pleasure. The Abbe Troubert
opened a window to get a better light on the folio volume he was
reading. Birotteau stood as if a thunderbolt had stricken him.
Mademoiselle Gamard made his ears hum when she enunciated in a voice as
clear as a cornet the following sentence:—

“Was it not agreed that if you left my house your furniture should
belong to me, to indemnify me for the difference in the price of board
paid by you and that paid by the late venerable Abbe Chapeloud? Now, as
the Abbe Poirel has just been appointed canon—”

Hearing the last words Birotteau made a feeble bow as if to take leave
of the old maid, and left the house precipitately. He was afraid if he
stayed longer that he should break down utterly, and give too great a
triumph to his implacable enemies. Walking like a drunken man he at last
reached Madame de Listomere’s house, where he found in one of the lower
rooms his linen, his clothing, and all his papers packed in a trunk.
When his eyes fell on these few remnants of his possessions the unhappy
priest sat down and hid his face in his hands to conceal his tears
from the sight of others. The Abbe Poirel was canon! He, Birotteau, had
neither home, nor means, nor furniture!

Fortunately Mademoiselle Salomon happened to drive past the house, and
the porter, who saw and comprehended the despair of the poor abbe, made
a sign to the coachman. After exchanging a few words with Mademoiselle
Salomon the porter persuaded the vicar to let himself be placed, half
dead as he was, in the carriage of his faithful friend, to whom he
was unable to speak connectedly. Mademoiselle Salomon, alarmed at the
momentary derangement of a head that was always feeble, took him back at
once to the Alouette, believing that this beginning of mental alienation
was an effect produced by the sudden news of Abbe Poirel’s nomination.
She knew nothing, of course, of the fatal agreement made by the abbe
with Mademoiselle Gamard, for the excellent reason that he did not
know of it himself; and because it is in the nature of things that the
comical is often mingled with the pathetic, the singular replies of the
poor abbe made her smile.

“Chapeloud was right,” he said; “he is a monster!”

“Who?” she asked.

“Chapeloud. He has taken all.”

“You mean Poirel?”

“No, Troubert.”

At last they reached the Alouette, where the priest’s friends gave him
such tender care that towards evening he grew calmer and was able to
give them an account of what had happened during the morning.

The phlegmatic old fox asked to see the deed which, on thinking the
matter over, seemed to him to contain the solution of the enigma.
Birotteau drew the fatal stamped paper from his pocket and gave it
to Monsieur de Bourbonne, who read it rapidly and soon came upon the
following clause:—

“Whereas a difference exists of eight hundred francs yearly between the
price of board paid by the late Abbe Chapeloud and that at which the
said Sophie Gamard agrees to take into her house, on the above-named
stipulated condition, the said Francois Birotteau; and whereas it is
understood that the undersigned Francois Birotteau is not able for
some years to pay the full price charged to the other boarders of
Mademoiselle Gamard, more especially the Abbe Troubert; the said
Birotteau does hereby engage, in consideration of certain sums of money
advanced by the undersigned Sophie Gamard, to leave her, as indemnity,
all the household property of which he may die possessed, or to transfer
the same to her should he, for any reason whatever or at any time,
voluntarily give up the apartment now leased to him, and thus derive
no further profit from the above-named engagements made by Mademoiselle
Gamard for his benefit—”

“Confound her! what an agreement!” cried the old gentleman. “The said
Sophie Gamard is armed with claws.”

Poor Birotteau never imagined in his childish brain that anything could
ever separate him from that house where he expected to live and die with
Mademoiselle Gamard. He had no remembrance whatever of that clause, the
terms of which he had not discussed, for they had seemed quite just to
him at a time when, in his great anxiety to enter the old maid’s house,
he would readily have signed any and all legal documents she had offered
him. His simplicity was so guileless and Mademoiselle Gamard’s conduct
so atrocious, the fate of the poor old man seemed so deplorable, and his
natural helplessness made him so touching, that in the first glow of
her indignation Madame de Listomere exclaimed: “I made you put your
signature to that document which has ruined you; I am bound to give you
back the happiness of which I have deprived you.”

“But,” remarked Monsieur de Bourbonne, “that deed constitutes a fraud;
there may be ground for a lawsuit.”

“Then Birotteau shall go to the law. If he loses at Tours he may win at
Orleans; if he loses at Orleans, he’ll win in Paris,” cried the Baron de
Listomere.

“But if he does go to law,” continued Monsieur de Bourbonne, coldly, “I
should advise him to resign his vicariat.”

“We will consult lawyers,” said Madame de Listomere, “and go to law if
law is best. But this affair is so disgraceful for Mademoiselle Gamard,
and is likely to be so injurious to the Abbe Troubert, that I think we
can compromise.”

After mature deliberation all present promised their assistance to the
Abbe Birotteau in the struggle which was now inevitable between the poor
priest and his antagonists and all their adherents. A true presentiment,
an infallible provincial instinct, led them to couple the names of
Gamard and Troubert. But none of the persons assembled on this occasion
in Madame de Listomere’s salon, except the old fox, had any real idea of
the nature and importance of such a struggle. Monsieur de Bourbonne took
the poor abbe aside into a corner of the room.

“Of the fourteen persons now present,” he said, in a low voice, “not
one will stand by you a fortnight hence. If the time comes when you need
some one to support you you may find that I am the only person in Tours
bold enough to take up your defence; for I know the provinces and men
and things, and, better still, I know self-interests. But these friends
of yours, though full of the best intentions, are leading you astray
into a bad path, from which you won’t be able to extricate yourself.
Take my advice; if you want to live in peace, resign the vicariat of
Saint-Gatien and leave Tours. Don’t say where you are going, but find
some distant parish where Troubert cannot get hold of you.”

“Leave Tours!” exclaimed the vicar, with indescribable terror.

To him it was a kind of death; the tearing up of all the roots by which
he held to life. Celibates substitute habits for feelings; and when to
that moral system, which makes them pass through life instead of really
living it, is added a feeble character, external things assume an
extraordinary power over them. Birotteau was like certain vegetables;
transplant them, and you stop their ripening. Just as a tree needs daily
the same sustenance, and must always send its roots into the same soil,
so Birotteau needed to trot about Saint-Gatien, and amble along the Mail
where he took his daily walk, and saunter through the streets, and visit
the three salons where, night after night, he played his whist or his
backgammon.

“Ah! I did not think of it!” replied Monsieur de Bourbonne, gazing at
the priest with a sort of pity.

All Tours was soon aware that Madame la Baronne de Listomere, widow of
a lieutenant-general, had invited the Abbe Birotteau, vicar of
Saint-Gatien, to stay at her house. That act, which many persons
questioned, presented the matter sharply and divided the town into
parties, especially after Mademoiselle Salomon spoke openly of a fraud
and a lawsuit. With the subtle vanity common to old maids, and the
fanatic self-love which characterizes them, Mademoiselle Gamard was
deeply wounded by the course taken by Madame de Listomere. The baroness
was a woman of high rank, elegant in her habits and ways, whose good
taste, courteous manners, and true piety could not be gainsaid.
By receiving Birotteau as her guest she gave a formal denial to all
Mademoiselle Gamard’s assertions, and indirectly censured her conduct by
maintaining the vicar’s cause against his former landlady.

It is necessary for the full understanding of this history to explain
how the natural discernment and spirit of analysis which old women bring
to bear on the actions of others gave power to Mademoiselle Gamard, and
what were the resources on her side. Accompanied by the taciturn Abbe
Troubert she made a round of evening visits to five or six houses, at
each of which she met a circle of a dozen or more persons, united by
kindred tastes and the same general situation in life. Among them were
one or two men who were influenced by the gossip and prejudices of their
servants; five or six old maids who spent their time in sifting the
words and scrutinizing the actions of their neighbours and others in the
class below them; besides these, there were several old women who
busied themselves in retailing scandal, keeping an exact account of
each person’s fortune, striving to control or influence the actions of
others, prognosticating marriages, and blaming the conduct of friends
as sharply as that of enemies. These persons, spread about the town like
the capillary fibres of a plant, sucked in, with the thirst of a leaf
for the dew, the news and the secrets of each household, and transmitted
them mechanically to the Abbe Troubert, as the leaves convey to the
branch the moisture they absorb.

Accordingly, during every evening of the week, these good devotees,
excited by that need of emotion which exists in all of us, rendered
an exact account of the current condition of the town with a sagacity
worthy of the Council of Ten, and were, in fact, a species of police,
armed with the unerring gift of spying bestowed by passions. When they
had divined the secret meaning of some event their vanity led them to
appropriate to themselves the wisdom of their sanhedrim, and set the
tone to the gossip of their respective spheres. This idle but ever busy
fraternity, invisible, yet seeing all things, dumb, but perpetually
talking, possessed an influence which its nonentity seemed to render
harmless, though it was in fact terrible in its effects when it
concerned itself with serious interests. For a long time nothing had
entered the sphere of these existences so serious and so momentous to
each one of them as the struggle of Birotteau, supported by Madame de
Listomere, against Mademoiselle Gamard and the Abbe Troubert. The three
salons of Madame de Listomere and the Demoiselles Merlin de la Blottiere
and de Villenoix being considered as enemies by all the salons which
Mademoiselle Gamard frequented, there was at the bottom of the quarrel
a class sentiment with all its jealousies. It was the old Roman
struggle of people and senate in a molehill, a tempest in a teacup, as
Montesquieu remarked when speaking of the Republic of San Marino, whose
public offices are filled by the day only,—despotic power being easily
seized by any citizen.

But this tempest, petty as it seems, did develop in the souls of these
persons as many passions as would have been called forth by the highest
social interests. It is a mistake to think that none but souls concerned
in mighty projects, which stir their lives and set them foaming, find
time too fleeting. The hours of the Abbe Troubert fled by as eagerly,
laden with thoughts as anxious, harassed by despairs and hopes as deep
as the cruellest hours of the gambler, the lover, or the statesman. God
alone is in the secret of the energy we expend upon our occult triumphs
over man, over things, over ourselves. Though we know not always
whither we are going we know well what the journey costs us. If it be
permissible for the historian to turn aside for a moment from the drama
he is narrating and ask his readers to cast a glance upon the lives of
these old maids and abbes, and seek the cause of the evil which
vitiates them at their source, we may find it demonstrated that man
must experience certain passions before he can develop within him those
virtues which give grandeur to life by widening his sphere and checking
the selfishness which is inherent in every created being.

Madame de Listomere returned to town without being aware that for the
previous week her friends had felt obliged to refute a rumour (at which
she would have laughed had she known it) that her affection for her
nephew had an almost criminal motive. She took Birotteau to her lawyer,
who did not regard the case as an easy one. The vicar’s friends,
inspired by the belief that justice was certain in so good a cause,
or inclined to procrastinate in a matter which did not concern them
personally, had put off bringing the suit until they returned to
Tours. Consequently the friends of Mademoiselle Gamard had taken the
initiative, and told the affair wherever they could to the injury of
Birotteau. The lawyer, whose practice was exclusively among the most
devout church people, amazed Madame de Listomere by advising her not
to embark on such a suit; he ended the consultation by saying that “he
himself would not be able to undertake it, for, according to the terms
of the deed, Mademoiselle Gamard had the law on her side, and in equity,
that is to say outside of strict legal justice, the Abbe Birotteau would
undoubtedly seem to the judges as well as to all respectable laymen
to have derogated from the peaceable, conciliatory, and mild character
hitherto attributed to him; that Mademoiselle Gamard, known to be a
kindly woman and easy to live with, had put Birotteau under obligations
to her by lending him the money he needed to pay the legacy duties on
Chapeloud’s bequest without taking from him a receipt; that Birotteau
was not of an age or character to sign a deed without knowing what
it contained or understanding the importance of it; that in leaving
Mademoiselle Gamard’s house at the end of two years, when his friend
Chapeloud had lived there twelve and Troubert fifteen, he must have had
some purpose known to himself only; and that the lawsuit, if undertaken,
would strike the public as an act of ingratitude;” and so forth. Letting
Birotteau go before them to the staircase, the lawyer detained Madame de
Listomere a moment to entreat her, if she valued her own peace of mind,
not to involve herself in the matter.

But that evening the poor vicar, suffering the torments of a man under
sentence of death who awaits in the condemned cell at Bicetre the result
of his appeal for mercy, could not refrain from telling his assembled
friends the result of his visit to the lawyer.

“I don’t know a single pettifogger in Tours,” said Monsieur de
Bourbonne, “except that Radical lawyer, who would be willing to take
the case,—unless for the purpose of losing it; I don’t advise you to
undertake it.”

“Then it is infamous!” cried the naval lieutenant. “I myself will take
the abbe to the Radical—”

“Go at night,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne, interrupting him.

“Why?”

“I have just learned that the Abbe Troubert is appointed vicar-general
in place of the other man, who died yesterday.”

“I don’t care a fig for the Abbe Troubert.”

Unfortunately the Baron de Listomere (a man thirty-six years of age) did
not see the sign Monsieur de Bourbonne made him to be cautious in what
he said, motioning as he did so to a friend of Troubert, a councillor of
the Prefecture, who was present. The lieutenant therefore continued:—

“If the Abbe Troubert is a scoundrel—”

“Oh,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne, cutting him short, “why bring Monsieur
Troubert into a matter which doesn’t concern him?”

“Not concern him?” cried the baron; “isn’t he enjoying the use of the
Abbe Birotteau’s household property? I remember that when I called on
the Abbe Chapeloud I noticed two valuable pictures. Say that they are
worth ten thousand francs; do you suppose that Monsieur Birotteau
meant to give ten thousand francs for living two years with that Gamard
woman,—not to speak of the library and furniture, which are worth as
much more?”

The Abbe Birotteau opened his eyes at hearing he had once possessed so
enormous a fortune.

The baron, getting warmer than ever, went on to say: “By Jove! there’s
that Monsieur Salmon, formerly an expert at the Museum in Paris; he is
down here on a visit to his mother-in-law. I’ll go and see him this very
evening with the Abbe Birotteau and ask him to look at those pictures
and estimate their value. From there I’ll take the abbe to the lawyer.”

Two days after this conversation the suit was begun. This employment of
the Liberal lawyer did harm to the vicar’s cause. Those who were opposed
to the government, and all who were known to dislike the priests, or
religion (two things quite distinct which many persons confound), got
hold of the affair and the whole town talked of it. The Museum expert
estimated the Virgin of Valentin and the Christ of Lebrun, two paintings
of great beauty, at eleven thousand francs. As to the bookshelves
and the gothic furniture, the taste for such things was increasing
so rapidly in Paris that their immediate value was at least twelve
thousand. In short, the appraisal of the whole property by the expert
reached the sum of over thirty-six thousand francs. Now it was very
evident that Birotteau never intended to give Mademoiselle Gamard such
an enormous sum of money for the small amount he might owe her under the
terms of the deed; therefore he had, legally speaking, equitable grounds
on which to demand an amendment of the agreement; if this were denied,
Mademoiselle Gamard was plainly guilty of intentional fraud. The Radical
lawyer accordingly began the affair by serving a writ on Mademoiselle
Gamard. Though very harsh in language, this document, strengthened by
citations of precedents and supported by certain clauses in the Code,
was a masterpiece of legal argument, and so evidently just in its
condemnation of the old maid that thirty or forty copies were made and
maliciously distributed through the town.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
IV

A few days after the commencement of hostilities between Birotteau and
the old maid, the Baron de Listomere, who expected to be made captain of
a corvette in a coming promotion announced by the minister of the
Navy, received a letter from a friend warning him that there was some
intention of putting him on the retired list. Greatly astonished, he
started for Paris immediately, and went at once to the minister, who
seemed amazed himself and even laughed at the baron’s fears. The next
day, however, despite the minister’s assurance, Monsieur de Listomere
made inquiries in the different offices. By an indiscretion (often
practised by heads of departments in favor of friends) one of the
secretaries showed him a document confirming the fatal news, which was
only waiting the signature of the director, who was ill, to be submitted
to the minister.

The Baron de Listomere went immediately to an uncle of his, a deputy,
who could see the minister of the Navy at the chamber without loss of
time, and begged him to find out the real intentions of his Excellency
in a matter which threatened the loss of his whole future. He waited in
his uncle’s carriage with the utmost anxiety for the end of the session.
His uncle came out before the Chamber rose and said to him at once as
they drove away: “Why the devil have you meddled in a priest’s quarrel?
The minister began by telling me you had put yourself at the head of the
Radicals in Tours; that your political opinions were objectionable; you
were not following the government,--with other remarks as involved as if
he were addressing the Chamber. On that I said to him, ‘Nonsense; let us
come to the point.’ The end was that his Excellency told me frankly you
were in bad odor with the diocese. In short, I made a few inquiries
among my colleagues, and I find that you have been talking slightingly
of a certain Abbe Troubert, the vicar-general, but a very important
personage in the province, where he represents the Jesuits. I have made
myself responsible to the minister for your future conduct. My good
nephew, if you want to make your way be careful not to excite
ecclesiastical enmities. Go at once to Tours and try to make your peace
with that devil of a vicar-general; remember such priests are men with
whom we absolutely must live in harmony. Good heavens! when we are all
striving and working to re-establish religion it is actually stupid, in
a lieutenant who wants to be made a captain, to affront the priests. If
you don’t make up matters with that Abbe Troubert you needn’t count on
me; I shall abandon you. The minister of ecclesiastical affairs told me
just now that Troubert was certain to be made bishop before long; if he
takes a dislike to our family he could hinder me from being included in
the next batch of peers. Don’t you understand?”

These words explained to the naval officer the nature of Troubert’s
secret occupations, about which Birotteau often remarked in his silly
way: “I can’t think what he does with himself,--sitting up all night.”

The canon’s position amid his female senate, converted so adroitly into
provincial detectives, and his personal capacity, had induced the
Congregation of Jesus to select him out of all the ecclesiastics in the
town as the secret proconsul of Touraine. Archbishop, general, prefect,
all men, great and small, were under his occult dominion. The Baron de
Listomere decided at once on his course.

“I shall take care,” he said to his uncle, “not to get another round
shot below my water-line.”

Three days after this diplomatic conference the baron, returning hurriedly
in a post-chaise, informed his aunt, the very night of his arrival, of
the dangers the family ran if they persisted in supporting that “fool of
a Birotteau.” The baron had detained Monsieur de Bourbonne as the old
gentleman was taking his hat and cane after the usual rubber of whist.
The clear-sightedness of that sly old fox seemed indispensable for an
understanding of the reefs among which the Listomere family suddenly
found themselves; perhaps taking his hat and cane was only a ruse to
have it whispered in his ear: “Stay after the others; we want to talk to
you.”

The baron’s sudden return, his apparent satisfaction, which was out of
keeping with a harassed look that occasionally crossed his face, informed
Monsieur de Bourbonne vaguely that the lieutenant had met some check in
his crusade against Gamard and Troubert. He showed no surprise when the
baron revealed the secret power of the Jesuit vicar-general.

“I knew that,” he said.

“Then why,” cried the baroness, “did you not warn us?”

“Madame,” he said sharply, “forget that I was aware of the invisible
influence of that priest, and I will forget that you knew it equally
well. If we do not keep this secret now we shall be thought his
accomplices, and shall be more feared and hated than we are. Do as I do;
pretend to be duped; but look carefully where you set your feet. I did
warn you sufficiently, but you would not understand me, and I did not
choose to compromise myself.”

“What must we do now?” said the baron.

The abandonment of Birotteau was not even made a question; it was a
first condition tacitly accepted by the three deliberators.

“To beat a retreat with the honors of war has always been the triumph of
the ablest generals,” replied Monsieur de Bourbonne. “Bow to Troubert,
and if his hatred is less strong than his vanity you will make him your
ally; but if you bow too low he will walk over you rough-shod; make
believe that you intend to leave the service, and you’ll escape him,
Monsieur le baron. Send away Birotteau, madame, and you will set things
right with Mademoiselle Gamard. Ask the Abbe Troubert, when you meet him
at the archbishop’s, if he can play whist. He will say yes. Then invite
him to your salon, where he wants to be received; he’ll be sure to come.
You are a woman, and you can certainly win a priest to your interests.
When the baron is promoted, his uncle peer of France, and Troubert a
bishop, you can make Birotteau a canon if you choose. Meantime yield,
—but yield gracefully, with a slight menace. Your family can give
Troubert quite as much support as he can give you. You’ll understand
each other perfectly on that score. As for you, sailor, carry your
deep-sea line about you.”

“Poor Birotteau?” said the baroness.

“Oh, get rid of him at once,” replied the old man, rising to take
leave. “If some clever Radical lays hold of that empty head of his, he
may cause you much trouble. After all, the court would certainly give a
verdict in his favour, and Troubert must fear that. He may forgive you
for beginning the struggle, but if they were defeated he would be
implacable. I have said my say.”

He snapped his snuff-box, put on his overshoes, and departed.

The next day after breakfast the baroness took the vicar aside and said
to him, not without visible embarrassment:—

“My dear Monsieur Birotteau, you will think what I am about to ask of
you very unjust and inconsistent; but it is necessary, both for you and
for us, that your lawsuit with Mademoiselle Gamard be withdrawn by
resigning your claims, and also that you should leave my house.”

As he heard these words the poor abbe turned pale.

“I am,” she continued, “the innocent cause of your misfortunes, and,
moreover, if it had not been for my nephew you would never have begun
this lawsuit, which has now turned to your injury and to ours. But
listen to me.”

She told him succinctly the immense ramifications of the affair, and
explained the serious nature of its consequences. Her own meditations
during the night had told her something of Troubert’s probable antecedents;
she was able, without misleading Birotteau, to show him the net so ably
woven round him by revenge, and to make him see the power and great
capacity of his enemy, whose hatred to Chapeloud, under whom he had
been forced to crouch for a dozen years, now found vent in seizing
Chapeloud’s property and in persecuting Chapeloud in the person of his
friend. The harmless Birotteau clasped his hands as if to pray, and wept
with distress at the sight of human horrors his pure soul could not
suspect. As frightened as though he had suddenly found himself at the
edge of a precipice, he listened with fixed, moist eyes to the
revelations of his friend, who ended by saying: “I know the wrong I do
in abandoning your cause; but, my dear abbe, family duties must be
considered before those of friendship. Yield, as I do, to this storm,
and I will prove my gratitude. I am not talking of your worldly
interests, for those I take charge of. You shall be made free of all
such anxieties for the rest of your life. By means of Monsieur de
Bourbonne, who will know how to save appearances, I shall arrange
matters so that you shall lack nothing. My friend, grant me the right
to abandon you. I shall ever be your friend, though forced to conform to
the axioms of the world. You must decide.”

The poor, bewildered abbe cried aloud: “Chapeloud was right when he said
that if Troubert could drag him by the feet out of his grave he would do
it! He sleeps in Chapeloud’s bed!”

“There is no use in lamenting,” said Madame de Listomere, “and we have
little time now left to us. How will you decide?”

Birotteau was too good and kind not to obey in a great crisis the
unreflecting impulse of the moment. Besides, his life was already in
the agony of what to him was death. He said, with a despairing look at
his protectress which cut her to the heart, “I trust myself to you--I am
but the stubble of the streets.”

He used the Tourainean word “bourrier,” meaning a bit of straw: not the
pretty polished straw children delight in, but sodden, discolored
stubble.

“But, madame, I cannot let the Abbe Troubert keep Chapeloud’s portrait.
It was painted for me; it belongs to me; obtain that for me, and I will
give up all the rest.”

“Well,” said Madame de Listomere, “I will go myself to Mademoiselle
Gamard.” The words were said in a tone which plainly showed the immense
effort she was making in lowering herself to flatter the pride of the old
maid. “I will see what can be done,” she said; “I hardly dare hope
anything. Go and consult Monsieur de Bourbonne; ask him to put your
renunciation into proper form, and bring me the paper. I will see the
archbishop, and with his help we may be able to stop the matter here.”

Birotteau left the house dismayed. Troubert assumed in his eyes the
dimensions of an Egyptian pyramid. The hands of that man were in Paris,
his elbows in the Cloister of Saint-Gatien.

“He!” said the victim to himself, “He to prevent the Baron de
Listomere from becoming peer of France!--and, perhaps, ‘by the help of
the archbishop we may be able to stop the matter here’!”

In presence of such great interests Birotteau felt he was a mere worm;
he judged himself harshly.

The news of Birotteau’s removal from Madame de Listomere’s house seemed
all the more amazing because the reason of it was wholly impenetrable.
Madame de Listomere said that her nephew was intending to marry and
leave the navy, and she wanted the vicar’s apartment to enlarge her own.
Birotteau’s relinquishment was still unknown. The advice of Monsieur de
Bourbonne was followed. Whenever the two facts reached the ears of the
vicar-general his self-love was sure to be gratified by the assurance
they gave that even if the Listomere family did not capitulate they
would at least remain neutral and tacitly recognize the occult power of
the Congregation,--to recognize it was, in fact, to submit to it. But
the lawsuit was still sub-judice; his opponents yielded and threatened at
the same time.

The Listomeres thus took precisely the same attitude as the vicar-
general himself; they held themselves aloof, and yet were able to
direct others. But just at this crisis an event occurred which
complicated the plans laid by Monsieur de Bourbonne and the Listomeres
to quiet the Gamard and Troubert party, and made them more difficult to
carry out.

Mademoiselle Gamard took cold one evening in coming out of the
cathedral; the next day she was confined to her bed, and soon after
became dangerously ill. The whole town rang with pity and false
commiseration: “Mademoiselle Gamard’s sensitive nature has not been able
to bear the scandal of this lawsuit. In spite of the justice of her
cause she was likely to die of grief. Birotteau has killed his
benefactress.” Such speeches poured through the capillary tubes of the
great female conclave, and were taken up and repeated by the whole town
of Tours.

Madame de Listomere went the day after Mademoiselle Gamard took cold
to pay the promised visit, and had the mortification of that act without
obtaining any benefit, for the old maid was too ill to see her. She then
asked politely to speak to the vicar-general.

Gratified to receive in Chapeloud’s library, at the corner of the
fireplace above which hung the two contested pictures, the woman who
had hitherto ignored him, Troubert kept the baroness waiting a moment
before he consented to admit her. No courtier and no diplomatist ever
put into a discussion of personal interests or into the management of a
great negotiation more shrewdness, dissimulation, and ability than the
baroness and the priest displayed when they met face to face for the
struggle.

Like the seconds or sponsors who in the Middle Age armed the champion,
and strengthened his valor by useful counsel until he entered the
lists, so the sly old fox had said to the baroness at the last moment:
“Don’t forget your cue. You are a mediator, and not an interested
party. Troubert also is a mediator. Weigh your words; study the
inflection of the man’s voice. If he strokes his chin you have got him.”

Some sketchers like to caricature the contrast often observable between
“what is said” and “what is thought” by the speaker. To catch the full
meaning of the duel of words which now took place between the priest
and the lady, it is necessary to unveil the thoughts each hid from the
other under spoken sentences of apparent insignificance. Madame de
Listomere began by expressing the regret she felt at Birotteau’s
lawsuit; then went on to speak of her desire to settle the matter to
both parties’ satisfaction.

“The harm is done, madame,” said the priest in a grave voice. “The
pious and excellent Mademoiselle Gamard is dying.” (I don’t care a fig
for the old thing, thought he; but I mean to put her death on your
shoulders and harass your conscience if you are such a fool as to listen
to it.)

“On hearing of her illness,” replied the baroness, “I entreated Monsieur
Birotteau to relinquish his claims; I have brought the document,
intending to give it to that excellent woman.” (I see what you mean, you
wily scoundrel, thought she; but we are safe now from your calumnies.
If you take this document you’ll cut your own fingers by admitting you
are an accomplice.)

There was silence for a moment.

“Mademoiselle Gamard’s temporal affairs do not concern me,” said the
priest at last, lowering the large lids over his eagle eyes to veil his
emotions. (Ho! ho! thought he; you can’t compromise me. Thank God,
those damned lawyers won’t dare plead any cause that could smirch me.)
“What do these Listomeres expect to get by crouching in this way?”

“Monsieur,” replied the baroness, “Monsieur Birotteau’s affairs are no
more mine than those of Mademoiselle Gamard are yours; but, unfortunately,
religion is injured by such a quarrel, and I come to you as a mediator--
just as I myself am seeking to make peace.” (We are not deceiving each
other, Monsieur Troubert, thought she. Don’t you feel the sarcasm of
that answer?)

“Injury to religion, madame!” exclaimed the vicar-general. “Religion is
too lofty for the actions of men to injure.” (My religion is I, thought
he.) “God makes no mistake in His judgments, madame; I recognize no
tribunal but His.”

“Then, monsieur,” she replied, “let us endeavor to bring the judgments
of men into harmony with the judgments of God.” (Yes, indeed, your
religion is you.)

The Abbe Troubert suddenly changed his tone.

“Your nephew has been to Paris, I believe.” (You found out about me
there, thought he; you know now that I can crush you, you who dared to
slight me, and you have come to capitulate.)

“Yes, monsieur; thank you for the interest you take in him. He returns
to-night; the minister, who is very considerate of us, sent for him;
he does not want Monsieur de Listomere to leave the service.” (Jesuit,
you can’t crush us, thought she. I understand your civility.)

A moment’s silence.

“I did not think my nephew’s conduct in this affair quite the thing,”
she added; “but naval men must be excused; they know nothing of law.”
(Come, we had better make peace, thought she; we sha’n’t gain anything
by battling in this way.)

A slight smile wandered over the priest’s face and was lost in its
wrinkles.

“He has done us the service of getting a proper estimate on the value
of those paintings,” he said, looking up at the pictures. “They will be
a noble ornament to the chapel of the Virgin.” (You shot a sarcasm at
me, thought he, and there’s another in return; we are quits, madame.)

“If you intend to give them to Saint-Gatien, allow me to offer frames
that will be more suitable and worthy of the place, and of the works
themselves.” (I wish I could force you to betray that you have taken
Birotteau’s things for your own, thought she.)

“They do not belong to me,” said the priest, on his guard.

“Here is the deed of relinquishment,” said Madame de Listomere; “it ends
all discussion, and makes them over to Mademoiselle Gamard.” She laid
the document on the table. (See the confidence I place in you, thought
she.) “It is worthy of you, monsieur,” she added, “worthy of your noble
character, to reconcile two Christians,--though at present I am not
especially concerned for Monsieur Birotteau--”

“He is living in your house,” said Troubert, interrupting her.

“No, monsieur, he is no longer there.” (That peerage and my nephew’s
promotion force me to do base things, thought she.)

The priest remained impassible, but his calm exterior betrayed violent
emotion. Monsieur Bourbonne alone had fathomed the secret of that
apparent tranquillity. The priest had triumphed!

“Why did you take upon yourself to bring that relinquishment,” he
asked, with a feeling analogous to that which impels a woman to fish
for compliments.

“I could not avoid a feeling of compassion. Birotteau, whose feeble
nature must be well known to you, entreated me to see Mademoiselle
Gamard and to obtain as the price of his renunciation--”

The priest frowned.

“of rights upheld by distinguished lawyers, the portrait of--”

Troubert looked fixedly at Madame de Listomere.

“the portrait of Chapeloud,” she said, continuing: “I leave you to judge
of his claim.” (You will be certain to lose your case if we go to law,
and you know it, thought she.)

The tone of her voice as she said “distinguished lawyers” showed the
priest that she knew well both the strength and weakness of the enemy.
She made her talent so plain in a conversation which lasted a long time
in the tone here given, that Troubert finally went down to Mademoiselle
Gamard to obtain her answer to Birotteau’s request for the portrait.

He soon returned.

“Madame,” he said, “I bring you the words of a dying woman. ‘The Abbe
Chapeloud was so true a friend to me,’ she said, ‘that I cannot consent
to part with his picture.’ As for me,” added Troubert, “if it were mine
I would not yield it. My feelings to my late friend were so faithful
that I should feel my right to his portrait was above that of others.”

“Well, there’s no need to quarrel over a bad picture.” (I care as little
about it as you do, thought she.) “Keep it, and I will have a copy made
of it. I take some credit to myself for having averted this deplorable
lawsuit; and I have gained, personally, the pleasure of your acquaintance.
I hear you have a great talent for whist. You will forgive a woman for
curiosity,” she said, smiling. “If you will come and play at my house
sometimes you cannot doubt your welcome.”

Troubert stroked his chin. (Caught! Bourbonne was right, thought she;
he has his quantum of vanity.)

It was true. The vicar-general felt the delightful sensation which
Mirabeau was unable to subdue when in days of power he found gates
opening to his carriage that were barred him earlier.

“Madame,” he replied, “my avocations prevent my going much into society;
but for you, what will not a man do?” (The old maid is going to die;
I’ll get a footing at the Listomere’s, and serve them if they serve
me, thought he. It is better to have them for friends than enemies.)

Madame de Listomere went home, hoping the archbishop would complete the
work of peace so auspiciously begun. But Birotteau was fated to gain
nothing by his relinquishment. Mademoiselle Gamard died the next day.
No one felt surprised when her will was opened to find she had left
everything to the Abbe Troubert. Her fortune was appraised at three
hundred thousand francs. The vicar-general sent Madame de Listomere two
notes of invitation for the services and for the funeral procession of
his friend; one for herself and one for her nephew.

“We must go,” she said.

“It can’t be helped,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne. “It is a test to
which Troubert puts you. Baron, you must go to the cemetery,” he added,
turning to the lieutenant, who, unluckily for him, had not left Tours.

The services took place and were performed with unusual ecclesiastical
magnificence. Only one person wept, and that was Birotteau, who kneeling
in a side chapel and seen by none, believed himself guilty of the death
and prayed sincerely for the soul of the deceased, bitterly deploring
that he was not able to obtain her forgiveness before she died.

The Abbe Troubert followed the body of his friend to the grave; at the
verge of which he delivered a discourse that, thanks to his eloquence,
enlarged the narrow life the old maid had lived to monumental proportions.
Those present took particular note of the following words in the peroration:—

“This life of days devoted to God and to His religion, a life adorned
with noble actions silently performed, and with modest and hidden
virtues, was crushed by a sorrow which we might call undeserved if we
could forget, here at the verge of this grave, that our afflictions are
sent by God. The numerous friends of this saintly woman, knowing the
innocence and nobility of her soul, foresaw that she would issue safely
from her trials in spite of the accusations which blasted her life. It
may be that Providence has called her to the bosom of God to withdraw
her from those trials. Happy they who can rest here below in the peace
of their own hearts as Sophie now is resting in her robe of innocence
among the blest.”

“When he had ended his pompous discourse,” said Monsieur de Bourbonne,
after relating the incidents of the internment to Madame de Listomere
when whist was over, the doors shut, and they were alone with the baron,
“this Louis XI in a cassock—imagine him if you can—gave a last flourish
to the sprinkler and aspersed the coffin with holy water.” Monsieur de
Bourbonne picked up the tongs and imitated the priest’s gesture so
satirically that the baron and his aunt could not help laughing. “Not
until then,” continued the old gentleman, “did he contradict himself.
Up to that time his behavior had been perfect; but it was no doubt
impossible for him to put the old maid, whom he despised so heartily and
hated almost as much as he hated Chapeloud, out of sight forever without
allowing his joy to appear in that last gesture.”

The next day Mademoiselle Salomon came to breakfast with Madame de
Listomere, chiefly to say, with deep emotion: “Our poor Abbe Birotteau
has just received a frightful blow, which shows the most determined
hatred. He is appointed curate of Saint-Symphorien.”

Saint-Symphorien is a suburb of Tours lying beyond the bridge. That
bridge, one of the finest monuments of French architecture, is nineteen
hundred feet long, and the two open squares which surround each end are
precisely alike.

“Don’t you see the misery of it?” she said, after a pause, amazed at the
coldness with which Madame de Listomere received the news. “It is just
as if the abbe were a hundred miles from Tours, from his friends, from
everything! It is a frightful exile, and all the more cruel because he
is kept within sight of the town where he can hardly ever come. Since
his troubles he walks very feebly, yet he will have to walk three miles
to see his old friends. He has taken to his bed, just now, with fever.
The parsonage at Saint-Symphorien is very cold and damp, and the parish
is too poor to repair it. The poor old man will be buried in a living
tomb. Oh, it is an infamous plot!”

To end this history it will suffice to relate a few events simply, and
to give one last picture of its chief personages.

Five months later the vicar-general was made Bishop of Troyes; and
Madame de Listomere was dead, leaving an annuity of fifteen hundred
francs to the Abbe Birotteau. The day on which the dispositions in her
will were made known Monseigneur Hyacinthe, Bishop of Troyes, was about
to leave Tours to reside in his diocese, but he delayed his departure
on receiving the news. Furious at being foiled by a woman to whom he
had lately given his countenance while she had been secretly holding
the hand of a man he regarded as his enemy, Troubert again threatened
the baron’s future career, and put in jeopardy the peerage of his
uncle. He made in the salon of the archbishop, and before an assembled
party, one of those priestly speeches which are big with vengeance and
soft with honied mildness. The Baron de Listomere went the next day to
see this implacable enemy, who must have imposed sundry hard conditions
on him, for the baron’s subsequent conduct showed entire submission to
the will of the terrible Jesuit.

The new bishop made over Mademoiselle Gamard’s house by deed of gift
to the Chapter of the cathedral; he gave Chapeloud’s books and
bookcases to the seminary; he presented the two disputed pictures to
the Chapel of the Virgin; but he kept Chapeloud’s portrait. No one knew
how to explain this almost total renunciation of Mademoiselle Gamard’s
bequest. Monsieur de Bourbonne supposed the bishop had secretly kept
moneys that were invested, so as to support his rank with dignity in
Paris, where he would take his seat on the Bishops’ bench in the Upper
Chamber. It was not until the night before Monseigneur Troubert’s
departure from Tours that the sly old fox unearthed the hidden reason
of this strange action: the deathblow given by the most persistent
vengeance to the feeblest of victims. Madame de Listomere’s legacy to
Birotteau was contested by the Baron de Listomere under a pretence of
undue influence!

A few days after the case was brought the baron was promoted to the rank
of captain. As a measure of ecclesiastical discipline, the curate of
Saint-Symphorien was suspended. His superiors judged him guilty. The
murderer of Sophie Gamard was also a swindler. If Monseigneur Troubert
had kept Mademoiselle Gamard’s property he would have found it difficult
to make the ecclesiastical authorities censure Birotteau.

At the moment when Monseigneur Hyacinthe, Bishop of Troyes, drove along
the quay Saint-Symphorien in a post-chaise on his way to Paris, poor
Birotteau had been placed in an armchair in the sun on a terrace above
the road. The unhappy priest, smitten by the archbishop, was pale and
haggard. Grief, stamped on every feature, distorted the face that was
once so mildly gay. Illness had dimmed his eyes, formerly brightened by
the pleasures of good living and devoid of serious ideas, with a veil
which simulated thought. It was but the skeleton of the old Birotteau
who had rolled only one year earlier so vacuous but so content along the
Cloister. The bishop cast one look of pity and contempt upon his
victim; then he consented to forget him, and went his way.

There is no doubt that Troubert would have been in other times a
Hildebrand or an Alexander the Sixth. In these days the Church is no
longer a political power, and does not absorb the whole strength of her
solitaries. Celibacy, however, presents the inherent vice of
concentrating the faculties of man upon a single passion, egotism,
which renders celibates either useless or mischievous. We live at a
period when the defect of governments is to make Man for Society rather
than Society for Man. There is a perpetual struggle between the
Individual and the Social system which insists on using him, while he
endeavors to use it to his own profit; whereas, in former days, man,
really more free, was also more loyal to the public weal. The round in
which men struggle in these days has been widened; the soul that can
grasp it as a whole will ever be a magnificent exception; for, as a
general thing, in morals as in physics, impulsion loses in intensity
what it gains in extension. Society cannot be based on exceptions. Man
in the first instance was purely and simply father; his heart beat
warmly, concentrated in the one ray of Family. Later he lived for a
clan, or a small community; hence the great historical devotions of
Greece and Rome. After that he was a man of caste or of a religion, to
maintain the greatness of which he often proved himself sublime; but by
that time the field of his interests became enlarged by many intellectual
regions. In our day, his life is attached to that of a vast country; 
sooner or later his family will be, it is predicted, the entire universe.

Will this moral cosmopolitanism, the hope of Christian Rome, prove to
be only a sublime error? It is natural to believe in realization of a
noble vision, in the Brotherhood of Man. But, alas! the human machine
does not have such divine proportions. Souls vast enough to grasp a
range of feelings bestowed on great men only will never belong to
either fathers of families or simple citizens. Some physiologists have
thought that as the brain enlarges the heart narrows; but they are
mistaken. The apparent egotism of men who bear a science, a nation, a
code of laws in their bosom is the noblest of passions; it is, as one
may say, the maternity of the masses; to give birth to new peoples, to
produce new ideas they must unite within their mighty brains the
breasts of woman and the force of God. The history of such men as
Innocent the Third and Peter the Great, and all great leaders of their
age and nation will show, if need be, in the highest spheres the same
vast thought of which Troubert was made the representative in the quiet
depths of the Cloister of Saint-Gatien.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Birotteau, Abbe Francois
       The Lily of the Valley
       Cesar Birotteau

     Bourbonne, De
       Madame Firmiani

     Listomere, Baronne de
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Muse of the Department

     Troubert, Abbe Hyacinthe
       The Member for Arcis

     Villenoix, Pauline Salomon de
       Louis Lambert
       A Seaside Tragedy
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################