THE TWO BROTHERS


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley





DEDICATION

To Monsieur Charles Nodier, member of the French Academy, etc.

Here, my dear Nodier, is a book filled with deeds that are screened from
the action of the laws by the closed doors of domestic life; but as
to which the finger of God, often called chance, supplies the place
of human justice, and in which the moral is none the less striking and
instructive because it is pointed by a scoffer.

To me, such deeds contain great lessons for the Family and for
Maternity. We shall some day realize, perhaps too late, the effects
produced by the diminution of paternal authority. That authority, which
formerly ceased only at the death of the father, was the sole human
tribunal before which domestic crimes could be arraigned; kings
themselves, on special occasions, took part in executing its judgments.
However good and tender a mother may be, she cannot fulfil the function
of the patriarchal royalty any more than a woman can take the place of
a king upon the throne. Perhaps I have never drawn a picture that shows
more plainly how essential to European society is the indissoluble
marriage bond, how fatal the results of feminine weakness, how great the
dangers arising from selfish interests when indulged without restraint.
May a society which is based solely on the power of wealth shudder as it
sees the impotence of the law in dealing with the workings of a system
which deifies success, and pardons every means of attaining it. May
it return to the Catholic religion, for the purification of its masses
through the inspiration of religious feeling, and by means of an
education other than that of a lay university.

In the “Scenes from Military Life” so many fine natures, so many high
and noble self-devotions will be set forth, that I may here be allowed
to point out the depraving effect of the necessities of war upon certain
minds who venture to act in domestic life as if upon the field of
battle.

You have cast a sagacious glance over the events of our own time; its
philosophy shines, in more than one bitter reflection, through your
elegant pages; you have appreciated, more clearly than other men,
the havoc wrought in the mind of our country by the existence of four
distinct political systems. I cannot, therefore, place this history
under the protection of a more competent authority. Your name may,
perhaps, defend my work against the criticisms that are certain to
follow it,--for where is the patient who keeps silence when the surgeon
lifts the dressing from his wound?

To the pleasure of dedicating this Scene to you, is joined the pride I
feel in thus making known your friendship for one who here subscribes
himself

                                        Your sincere admirer,

                                        De Balzac
                                        Paris, November, 1842.





THE TWO BROTHERS




CHAPTER I

In 1792 the townspeople of Issoudun enjoyed the services of a physician
named Rouget, whom they held to be a man of consummate malignity. Were
we to believe certain bold tongues, he made his wife extremely unhappy,
although she was the most beautiful woman of the neighborhood. Perhaps,
indeed, she was rather silly. But the prying of friends, the slander of
enemies, and the gossip of acquaintances, had never succeeded in laying
bare the interior of that household. Doctor Rouget was a man of whom we
say in common parlance, “He is not pleasant to deal with.” Consequently,
during his lifetime, his townsmen kept silence about him and treated him
civilly. His wife, a demoiselle Descoings, feeble in health during her
girlhood (which was said to be a reason why the doctor married her),
gave birth to a son, and also to a daughter who arrived, unexpectedly,
ten years after her brother, and whose birth took the husband, doctor
though he were, by surprise. This late-comer was named Agathe.

These little facts are so simple, so commonplace, that a writer seems
scarcely justified in placing them in the fore-front of his history; yet
if they are not known, a man of Doctor Rouget’s stamp would be thought
a monster, an unnatural father, when, in point of fact, he was only
following out the evil tendencies which many people shelter under
the terrible axiom that “men should have strength of character,”--a
masculine phrase that has caused many a woman’s misery.

The Descoings, father-in-law and mother-in-law of the doctor, were
commission merchants in the wool-trade, and did a double business by
selling for the producers and buying for the manufacturers of the golden
fleeces of Berry; thus pocketing a commission on both sides. In this way
they grew rich and miserly--the outcome of many such lives. Descoings
the son, younger brother of Madame Rouget, did not like Issoudun. He
went to seek his fortune in Paris, where he set up as a grocer in the
rue Saint-Honore. That step led to his ruin. But nothing could have
hindered it: a grocer is drawn to his business by an attracting force
quite equal to the repelling force which drives artists away from it.
We do not sufficiently study the social potentialities which make up
the various vocations of life. It would be interesting to know what
determines one man to be a stationer rather than a baker; since, in our
day, sons are not compelled to follow the calling of their fathers,
as they were among the Egyptians. In this instance, love decided the
vocation of Descoings. He said to himself, “I, too, will be a grocer!”
 and in the same breath he said (also to himself) some other things
regarding his employer,--a beautiful creature, with whom he had fallen
desperately in love. Without other help than patience and the trifling
sum of money his father and mother sent him, he married the widow of his
predecessor, Monsieur Bixiou.

In 1792 Descoings was thought to be doing an excellent business. At that
time, the old Descoings were still living. They had retired from the
wool-trade, and were employing their capital in buying up the forfeited
estates,--another golden fleece! Their son-in-law Doctor Rouget, who,
about this time, felt pretty sure that he should soon have to mourn for
the death of his wife, sent his daughter to Paris to the care of his
brother-in-law, partly to let her see the capital, but still more to
carry out an artful scheme of his own. Descoings had no children. Madame
Descoings, twelve years older than her husband, was in good health,
but as fat as a thrush after harvest; and the canny Rouget knew enough
professionally to be certain that Monsieur and Madame Descoings,
contrary to the moral of fairy tales, would live happy ever after
without having any children. The pair might therefore become attached to
Agathe.

That young girl, the handsomest maiden in Issoudun, did not resemble
either father or mother. Her birth had caused a lasting breach between
Doctor Rouget and his intimate friend Monsieur Lousteau, a former
sub-delegate who had lately removed from the town. When a family
expatriates itself, the natives of a place as attractive as Issoudun
have a right to inquire into the reasons of so surprising a step. It was
said by certain sharp tongues that Doctor Rouget, a vindictive man, had
been heard to exclaim that Monsieur Lousteau should die by his hand.
Uttered by a physician, this declaration had the force of a cannon-ball.
When the National Assembly suppressed the sub-delegates, Lousteau
and his family left Issoudun, and never returned there. After their
departure Madame Rouget spent most of her time with the sister of the
late sub-delegate, Madame Hochon, who was the godmother of her daughter,
and the only person to whom she confided her griefs. The little that the
good town of Issoudun ever really knew of the beautiful Madame Rouget
was told by Madame Hochon,--though not until after the doctor’s death.

The first words of Madame Rouget, when informed by her husband that
he meant to send Agathe to Paris, were: “I shall never see my daughter
again.”

“And she was right,” said the worthy Madame Hochon.

After this, the poor mother grew as yellow as a quince, and her
appearance did not contradict the tongues of those who declared that
Doctor Rouget was killing her by inches. The behavior of her booby of a
son must have added to the misery of the poor woman so unjustly accused.
Not restrained, possibly encouraged by his father, the young fellow, who
was in every way stupid, paid her neither the attentions nor the respect
which a son owes to a mother. Jean-Jacques Rouget was like his father,
especially on the latter’s worst side; and the doctor at his best was
far from satisfactory, either morally or physically.

The arrival of the charming Agathe Rouget did not bring happiness to her
uncle Descoings; for in the same week (or rather, we should say decade,
for the Republic had then been proclaimed) he was imprisoned on a
hint from Robespierre given to Fouquier-Tinville. Descoings, who was
imprudent enough to think the famine fictitious, had the additional
folly, under the impression that opinions were free, to express that
opinion to several of his male and female customers as he served them
in the grocery. The citoyenne Duplay, wife of a cabinet-maker with whom
Robespierre lodged, and who looked after the affairs of that eminent
citizen, patronized, unfortunately, the Descoings establishment. She
considered the opinions of the grocer insulting to Maximilian the First.
Already displeased with the manners of Descoings, this illustrious
“tricoteuse” of the Jacobin club regarded the beauty of his wife as a
kind of aristocracy. She infused a venom of her own into the grocer’s
remarks when she repeated them to her good and gentle master, and
the poor man was speedily arrested on the well-worn charge of
“accaparation.”

No sooner was he put in prison, than his wife set to work to obtain his
release. But the steps she took were so ill-judged that any one hearing
her talk to the arbiters of his fate might have thought that she was in
reality seeking to get rid of him. Madame Descoings knew Bridau, one
of the secretaries of Roland, then minister of the interior,--the
right-hand man of all the ministers who succeeded each other in
that office. She put Bridau on the war-path to save her grocer. That
incorruptible official--one of the virtuous dupes who are always
admirably disinterested--was careful not to corrupt the men on whom
the fate of the poor grocer depended; on the contrary, he endeavored to
enlighten them. Enlighten people in those days! As well might he have
begged them to bring back the Bourbons. The Girondist minister, who was
then contending against Robespierre, said to his secretary, “Why do you
meddle in the matter?” and all others to whom the worthy Bridau appealed
made the same atrocious reply: “Why do you meddle?” Bridau then sagely
advised Madame Descoings to keep quiet and await events. But instead of
conciliating Robespierre’s housekeeper, she fretted and fumed against
that informer, and even complained to a member of the Convention,
who, trembling for himself, replied hastily, “I will speak of it to
Robespierre.” The handsome petitioner put faith in this promise, which
the other carefully forgot. A few loaves of sugar, or a bottle or two of
good liqueur, given to the citoyenne Duplay would have saved Descoings.

This little mishap proves that in revolutionary times it is quite
as dangerous to employ honest men as scoundrels; we should rely on
ourselves alone. Descoings perished; but he had the glory of going to
the scaffold with Andre Chenier. There, no doubt, grocery and poetry
embraced for the first time in the flesh; although they have, and ever
have had, intimate secret relations. The death of Descoings produced far
more sensation than that of Andre Chenier. It has taken thirty years to
prove to France that she lost more by the death of Chenier than by that
of Descoings.

This act of Robespierre led to one good result: the terrified grocers
let politics alone until 1830. Descoings’s shop was not a hundred yards
from Robespierre’s lodging. His successor was scarcely more fortunate
than himself. Cesar Birotteau, the celebrated perfumer of the “Queen
of Roses,” bought the premises; but, as if the scaffold had left some
inexplicable contagion behind it, the inventor of the “Paste of Sultans”
 and the “Carminative Balm” came to his ruin in that very shop. The
solution of the problem here suggested belongs to the realm of occult
science.

During the visits which Roland’s secretary paid to the unfortunate
Madame Descoings, he was struck with the cold, calm, innocent beauty
of Agathe Rouget. While consoling the widow, who, however, was too
inconsolable to carry on the business of her second deceased husband, he
married the charming girl, with the consent of her father, who hastened
to give his approval to the match. Doctor Rouget, delighted to hear that
matters were going beyond his expectations,--for his wife, on the death
of her brother, had become sole heiress of the Descoings,--rushed to
Paris, not so much to be present at the wedding as to see that the
marriage contract was drawn to suit him. The ardent and disinterested
love of citizen Bridau gave carte blanche to the perfidious doctor, who
made the most of his son-in-law’s blindness, as the following history
will show.

Madame Rouget, or, to speak more correctly, the doctor, inherited all
the property, landed and personal, of Monsieur and Madame Descoings the
elder, who died within two years of each other; and soon after that,
Rouget got the better, as we may say, of his wife, for she died at the
beginning of the year 1799. So he had vineyards and he bought farms, he
owned iron-works and he sold fleeces. His well-beloved son was stupidly
incapable of doing anything; but the father destined him for the state
in life of a land proprietor and allowed him to grow up in wealth and
silliness, certain that the lad would know as much as the wisest if he
simply let himself live and die. After 1799, the cipherers of Issoudun
put, at the very least, thirty thousand francs’ income to the doctor’s
credit. From the time of his wife’s death he led a debauched life,
though he regulated it, and kept it within the closed doors of his own house. This man, endowed with “strength of character,” died
in 1805, and God only knows what the townspeople of Issoudun said about
him then, and how many anecdotes they related of his horrible private
life. Jean-Jacques Rouget, whom his father, recognizing his stupidity,
had latterly treated with severity, remained a bachelor for certain
reasons, the explanation of which will form an important part of this
history. His celibacy was partly his father’s fault, as we shall see
later.

Meantime, it is well to inquire into the results of the secret vengeance
the doctor took on a daughter whom he did not recognize as his own, but
who, you must understand at once, was legitimately his. Not a person in
Issoudun had noticed one of those capricious facts that make the whole
subject of generation a vast abyss in which science flounders. Agathe
bore a strong likeness to the mother of Doctor Rouget. Just as gout
is said to skip a generation and pass from grandfather to grandson,
resemblances not uncommonly follow the same course.

In like manner, the eldest of Agathe’s children, who physically
resembled his mother, had the moral qualities of his grandfather, Doctor
Rouget. We will leave the solution of this problem to the twentieth
century, with a fine collection of microscopic animalculae; our
descendants may perhaps write as much nonsense as the scientific schools
of the nineteenth century have uttered on this mysterious and perplexing
question.

Agathe Rouget attracted the admiration of everyone by a face destined,
like that of Mary, the mother of our Lord, to continue ever virgin, even
after marriage. Her portrait, still to be seen in the atelier of Bridau,
shows a perfect oval and a clear whiteness of complexion, without the
faintest tinge of color, in spite of her golden hair. More than one
artist, looking at the pure brow, the discreet, composed mouth, the
delicate nose, the small ears, the long lashes, and the dark-blue eyes
filled with tenderness,--in short, at the whole countenance expressive
of placidity,--has asked the great artist, “Is that a copy of a
Raphael?” No man ever acted under a truer inspiration than the
minister’s secretary when he married this young girl. Agathe was an
embodiment of the ideal housekeeper brought up in the provinces and
never parted from her mother. Pious, though far from sanctimonious, she
had no other education than that given to women by the Church. Judged,
by ordinary standards, she was an accomplished wife, yet her ignorance
of life paved the way for great misfortunes. The epitaph on the Roman
matron, “She did needlework and kept the house,” gives a faithful
picture of her simple, pure, and tranquil existence.

Under the Consulate, Bridau attached himself fanatically to Napoleon,
who placed him at the head of a department in the ministry of the
interior in 1804, a year before the death of Doctor Rouget. With a
salary of twelve thousand francs and very handsome emoluments, Bridau
was quite indifferent to the scandalous settlement of the property at
Issoudun, by which Agathe was deprived of her rightful inheritance. Six
months before Doctor Rouget’s death he had sold one-half of his property
to his son, to whom the other half was bequeathed as a gift, and also in
accordance with his rights as heir. An advance of fifty thousand
francs on her inheritance, made to Agathe at the time of her marriage,
represented her share of the property of her father and mother.

Bridau idolized the Emperor, and served him with the devotion of a
Mohammedan for his prophet; striving to carry out the vast conceptions
of the modern demi-god, who, finding the whole fabric of France
destroyed, went to work to reconstruct everything. The new official
never showed fatigue, never cried “Enough.” Projects, reports, notes,
studies, he accepted all, even the hardest labors, happy in the
consciousness of aiding his Emperor. He loved him as a man, he adored
him as a sovereign, and he would never allow the least criticism of his
acts or his purposes.

From 1804 to 1808, the Bridaus lived in a handsome suite of rooms on the
Quai Voltaire, a few steps from the ministry of the interior and close
to the Tuileries. A cook and footman were the only servants of the
household during this period of Madame Bridau’s grandeur. Agathe, early
afoot, went to market with her cook. While the latter did the rooms, she
prepared the breakfast. Bridau never went to the ministry before
eleven o’clock. As long as their union lasted, his wife took the same
unwearying pleasure in preparing for him an exquisite breakfast, the
only meal he really enjoyed. At all seasons and in all weathers, Agathe
watched her husband from the window as he walked toward his office, and
never drew in her head until she had seen him turn the corner of the rue
du Bac. Then she cleared the breakfast-table herself, gave an eye to the
arrangement of the rooms, dressed for the day, played with her children and took them to walk, or received the visits of friends; all the
while waiting in spirit for Bridau’s return. If her husband brought him
important business that had to be attended to, she would station herself
close to the writing-table in his study, silent as a statue, knitting
while he wrote, sitting up as late as he did, and going to bed only a
few moments before him. Occasionally, the pair went to some theatre,
occupying one of the ministerial boxes. On those days, they dined at
a restaurant, and the gay scenes of that establishment never ceased to
give Madame Bridau the same lively pleasure they afford to provincials
who are new to Paris. Agathe, who was obliged to accept the formal
dinners sometimes given to the head of a department in a ministry, paid
due attention to the luxurious requirements of the then mode of dress,
but she took off the rich apparel with delight when she returned home,
and resumed the simple garb of a provincial. One day in the week,
Thursday, Bridau received his friends, and he also gave a grand ball,
annually, on Shrove Tuesday.

These few words contain the whole history of their conjugal life, which
had but three events; the births of two children, born three years
apart, and the death of Bridau, who died in 1808, killed by overwork
at the very moment when the Emperor was about to appoint him
director-general, count, and councillor of state. At this period of
his reign, Napoleon was particularly absorbed in the affairs of the
interior; he overwhelmed Bridau with work, and finally wrecked the
health of that dauntless bureaucrat. The Emperor, of whom Bridau had
never asked a favor, made inquiries into his habits and fortune. Finding
that this devoted servant literally had nothing but his situation,
Napoleon recognized him as one of the incorruptible natures which raised
the character of his government and gave moral weight to it, and he
wished to surprise him by the gift of some distinguished reward. But the
effort to complete a certain work, involving immense labor, before
the departure of the Emperor for Spain caused the death of the devoted
servant, who was seized with an inflammatory fever. When the Emperor,
who remained in Paris for a few days after his return to prepare for the
campaign of 1809, was told of Bridau’s death he said: “There are men
who can never be replaced.” Struck by the spectacle of a devotion which
could receive none of the brilliant recognitions that reward a soldier,
the Emperor resolved to create an order to requite civil services, just
as he had already created the Legion of honor to reward the military.
The impression he received from the death of Bridau led him to plan
the order of the Reunion. He had not time, however, to mature this
aristocratic scheme, the recollection of which is now so completely
effaced that many of my readers may ask what were its insignia: the
order was worn with a blue ribbon. The Emperor called it the Reunion,
under the idea of uniting the order of the Golden Fleece of Spain with
the order of the Golden Fleece of Austria. “Providence,” said a Prussian
diplomatist, “took care to frustrate the profanation.”

After Bridau’s death the Emperor inquired into the circumstances of his
widow. Her two sons each received a scholarship in the Imperial Lyceum,
and the Emperor paid the whole costs of their education from his
privy purse. He gave Madame Bridau a pension of four thousand francs,
intending, no doubt, to advance the fortune of her sons in future years.

From the time of her marriage to the death of her husband, Agathe had
held no communication with Issoudun. She lost her mother just as she was
on the point of giving birth to her youngest son, and when her father,
who, as she well knew, loved her little, died, the coronation of the
Emperor was at hand, and that event gave Bridau so much additional work
that she was unwilling to leave him. Her brother, Jean-Jacques Rouget,
had not written to her since she left Issoudun. Though grieved by the
tacit repudiation of her family, Agathe had come to think seldom of
those who never thought of her. Once a year she received a letter from
her godmother, Madame Hochon, to whom she replied with commonplaces,
paying no heed to the advice which that pious and excellent woman gave
to her, disguised in cautious words.

Some time before the death of Doctor Rouget, Madame Hochon had written
to her goddaughter warning her that she would get nothing from her
father’s estate unless she gave a power of attorney to Monsieur Hochon.
Agathe was very reluctant to harass her brother. Whether it were that
Bridau thought the spoliation of his wife in accordance with the laws
and customs of Berry, or that, high-minded as he was, he shared the
magnanimity of his wife, certain it is that he would not listen to
Roguin, his notary, who advised him to take advantage of his ministerial
position to contest the deeds by which the father had deprived the
daughter of her legitimate inheritance. Husband and wife thus tacitly
sanctioned what was done at Issoudun. Nevertheless, Roguin had forced
Bridau to reflect upon the future interests of his wife which were thus
compromised. He saw that if he died before her, Agathe would be left
without property, and this led him to look into his own affairs. He
found that between 1793 and 1805 his wife and he had been obliged to use
nearly thirty thousand of the fifty thousand francs in cash which old
Rouget had given to his daughter at the time of her marriage. He at once
invested the remaining twenty thousand in the public funds, then quoted
at forty, and from this source Agathe received about two thousand francs
a year. As a widow, Madame Bridau could live suitably on an income of
six thousand francs. With provincial good sense, she thought of changing
her residence, dismissing the footman, and keeping no servant except a
cook; but her intimate friend, Madame Descoings, who insisted on being
considered her aunt, sold her own establishment and came to live with
Agathe, turning the study of the late Bridau into her bedroom.

The two widows clubbed their revenues, and so were in possession of a
joint income of twelve thousand francs a year. This seems a very
simple and natural proceeding. But nothing in life is more deserving of
attention than the things that are called natural; we are on our guard
against the unnatural and extraordinary. For this reason, you will find
men of experience--lawyers, judges, doctors, and priests--attaching
immense importance to simple matters; and they are often thought
over-scrupulous. But the serpent amid flowers is one of the finest myths
that antiquity has bequeathed for the guidance of our lives. How often
we hear fools, trying to excuse themselves in their own eyes or in the
eyes of others, exclaiming, “It was all so natural that any one would
have been taken in.”

In 1809, Madame Descoings, who never told her age, was sixty-five. In
her heyday she had been popularly called a beauty, and was now one
of those rare women whom time respects. She owed to her excellent
constitution the privilege of preserving her good looks, which, however,
would not bear close examination. She was of medium height, plump, and
fresh, with fine shoulders and a rather rosy complexion. Her blond hair,
bordering on chestnut, showed, in spite of her husband’s catastrophe,
not a tinge of gray. She loved good cheer, and liked to concoct nice
little made dishes; yet, fond as she was of eating, she also adored
the theatre and cherished a vice which she wrapped in impenetrable
mystery--she bought into lotteries. Can that be the abyss of which
mythology warns us under the fable of the Danaides and their cask?
Madame Descoings, like other women who are lucky enough to keep young
for many years, spend rather too much upon her dress; but aside from
these trifling defects she was the pleasantest of women to live with.
Of every one’s opinion, never opposing anybody, her kindly and
communicative gayety gave pleasure to all. She had, moreover, a Parisian
quality which charmed the retired clerks and elderly merchants of her
circle,--she could take and give a jest. If she did not marry a third
time it was no doubt the fault of the times. During the wars of the
Empire, marrying men found rich and handsome girls too easily to trouble
themselves about women of sixty.

Madame Descoings, always anxious to cheer Madame Bridau, often took the
latter to the theatre, or to drive; prepared excellent little dinners
for her delectation, and even tried to marry her to her own son by her
first husband, Bixiou. Alas! to do this, she was forced to reveal a
terrible secret, carefully kept by her, by her late husband, and by
her notary. The young and beautiful Madame Descoings, who passed for
thirty-six years old, had a son who was thirty-five, named Bixiou,
already a widower, a major in the Twenty-Fourth Infantry, who
subsequently perished at Lutzen, leaving behind him an only son. Madame
Descoings, who only saw her grandson secretly, gave out that he was the
son of the first wife of her first husband. The revelation was partly
a prudential act; for this grandson was being educated with Madame
Bridau’s sons at the Imperial Lyceum, where he had a half-scholarship.
The lad, who was clever and shrewd at school, soon after made himself a
great reputation as draughtsman and designer, and also as a wit.

Agathe, who lived only for her children, declined to re-marry, as much
from good sense as from fidelity to her husband. But it is easier for a
woman to be a good wife than to be a good mother. A widow has two
tasks before her, whose duties clash: she is a mother, and yet she must
exercise parental authority. Few women are firm enough to understand and
practise this double duty. Thus it happened that Agathe, notwithstanding
her many virtues, was the innocent cause of great unhappiness. In the
first place, through her lack of intelligence and the blind confidence
to which such noble natures are prone, Agathe fell a victim to Madame
Descoings, who brought a terrible misfortune on the family. That worthy
soul was nursing up a combination of three numbers called a “trey” in a
lottery, and lotteries give no credit to their customers. As manager of
the joint household, she was able to pay up her stakes with the money
intended for their current expenses, and she went deeper and deeper into
debt, with the hope of ultimately enriching her grandson Bixiou, her
dear Agathe, and the little Bridaus. When the debts amounted to ten
thousand francs, she increased her stakes, trusting that her favorite
trey, which had not turned up in nine years, would come at last, and
fill to overflowing the abysmal deficit.

From that moment the debt rolled up rapidly. When it reached twenty
thousand francs, Madame Descoings lost her head, still failing to win
the trey. She tried to mortgage her own property to pay her niece, but
Roguin, who was her notary, showed her the impossibility of carrying out
that honorable intention. The late Doctor Rouget had laid hold of the
property of the brother-in-law after the grocer’s execution, and had,
as it were, disinherited Madame Descoings by securing to her a
life-interest on the property of his own son, Jean-Jacques Rouget. No
money-lender would think of advancing twenty thousand francs to a woman
sixty-six years of age, on an annuity of about four thousand, at a
period when ten per cent could easily be got for an investment. So one
morning Madame Descoings fell at the feet of her niece, and with sobs
confessed the state of things. Madame Bridau did not reproach her; she
sent away the footman and cook, sold all but the bare necessities of her
furniture, sold also three-fourths of her government funds, paid off the
debts, and bade farewell to her appartement.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER II

One of the worst corners in all Paris is undoubtedly that part of the rue Mazarin which lies between the rue Guenegard and its junction with the rue de Seine, behind the palace of the Institute. The high gray walls of the college and of the library which Cardinal Mazarin presented to the city of Paris, and which the French Academy would later inhabit, cast chill shadows over this angle of the street, where the sun seldom shines and the north wind blows. The poor ruined widow came to live on the third floor of a house standing at this damp, dark, cold corner. Opposite rose the Institute buildings, which contained the dens of ferocious animals known to the bourgeoisie as artists—tyros, or rapins, in the studios. Into these dens rapins enter, but they may come forth prix de Rome. The transformation does not take place without extraordinary uproar and disturbance at the time of year when the examinations are going on and the competitors are shut up in their cells. To win a prize, a sculptor had to make a clay model within a given time; a painter, a picture as at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts; a musician, a cantata; an architect, plans for a public building. At the time we write, this menagerie has already been removed from these cold and cheerless buildings to the elegant Palais des Beaux-Arts, nearby.

From Madame Bridau’s new windows one could penetrate the depths of those melancholy barred cages. To the north, the view was shut in by the dome of the Institute; looking up the street, the only distraction was a file of hackney-coaches at the upper end of the rue Mazarin. After a while the widow put boxes of earth before her windows and cultivated those aerial gardens that police regulations forbid, though their vegetables purified the atmosphere. The house, which backed up against another fronting on the rue de Seine, was necessarily shallow, and the staircase wound round upon itself. The third floor was the last. Three windows opened to three rooms—dining-room, a small salon, and a chamber on one side of the landing; on the other, a little kitchen and two single rooms; above, an immense garret without partitions. Madame Bridau chose this lodging for three reasons: economy, for it cost only four hundred francs a year so she took a nine-year lease; proximity to her sons’ school, the Imperial Lyceum being near; and because it was in the quarter to which she was used.

The inside of the appartement matched the general look of the house. The dining-room, hung with yellow paper covered with small green flowers and floored with unglazed tiles, contained nothing unnecessary—only a table, two sideboards, and six chairs brought from the other appartement. The salon was adorned with an Aubusson carpet given to Bridau when the ministry of the interior was refurnished. To this furniture the widow added one of those common mahogany sofas with Egyptian heads that Jacob Desmalter manufactured by the gross in 1806, covering it with a green silk bearing white geometric circles. Above it hung a pastel portrait of Bridau by an amateur, which at once attracted the eye. Though art might have objections, no one could fail to recognize the firmness of the noble and obscure citizen upon that brow. The serenity of the eyes, gentle yet proud, the sagacious mind testified by prudent lips, the frank smile, the atmosphere of the man of whom the Emperor had said, “Justum et tenacem,” had been caught, if not with talent, at least with fidelity. An observer could see that the man had done his duty. His countenance bore signs of the incorruptibility we attribute to those who served the Republic. On the opposite wall, over a card-table, flashed a picture of the Emperor in brilliant colors by Vernet; Napoleon was riding rapidly, attended by his escort.

Agathe had given herself two large birdcages—one with canaries, the other with Java sparrows. She had taken to this childish fancy since her husband’s loss, irreparable to her and to many others. By the end of three months her widowed chamber had become what it would remain until the day she left it forever—a litter of confusion beyond description. Cats domiciled on the sofa. The canaries, occasionally let loose, left their commas on the furniture. The poor dear woman scattered little heaps of millet and bits of chickweed about the room and put tidbits for the cats in broken saucers. Garments lay everywhere. The room breathed of the provinces and constancy. Everything that had belonged to Bridau was scrupulously preserved. Even the implements in his desk received the care a paladin’s widow might have given her husband’s armor. One slight detail reveals her devotion: she had wrapped up a pen, sealed the package, and written, “Last pen used by my dear husband.” The cup from which he drank his last draught was on the fireplace; caps and false hair were later tossed over the glass globes covering these relics. After Bridau’s death, not a trace of coquetry, not even ordinary care of her person, remained in the young widow of thirty-five. Parted from the only man she had known, esteemed, and loved—one who had never caused her the slightest unhappiness—she was no longer conscious of her womanhood; all things were nothing to her; she no longer even thought of dress. Nothing was ever more simply done or more complete than this renunciation of conjugal happiness and personal charm. Some people, through love, transfer the self to another; when death takes that other, no life of their own is possible.

Agathe now lived only for her children and was infinitely sad at the privations this financial ruin would bring them. From her removal to the rue Mazarin a shade of melancholy came upon her face, making it very touching. She hoped a little in the Emperor; but the Emperor could do no more than he was already doing—he gave three hundred francs a year to each child from his privy purse, besides scholarships.

As for the brilliant Descoings, she occupied an appartement on the second floor similar to her niece’s above. She had assigned Madame Bridau three thousand francs out of her annuity. Roguin, the notary, attended to this in Madame Bridau’s interest, but it would take seven years of slow repayment to make good the loss. The Descoings, thus reduced to an income of twelve hundred francs, lived with her niece in a small way. These timid creatures employed a woman-of-all-work for the morning only. Madame Descoings liked to cook and prepared the dinner. In the evenings a few old friends, persons employed at the ministry who owed their places to Bridau, came for a game of cards with the two widows. Madame Descoings still cherished her trey, which she declared was obstinate about turning up. She hoped, by one grand stroke, to repay the enforced loan she had made upon her niece. She was dearer to the little Bridaus than her grandson Bixiou—partly from a sense of wrong she had done them, partly because she felt the kindness of her niece, who, under her worst deprivations, never uttered a word of reproach. So Philippe and Joseph were cosseted, and the old gambler of the Imperial Lottery (like other who have a vice to atone for) cooked them nice little dinners with plenty of sweets. Later, Philippe and Joseph could extract small sums from her pocket with ease—the younger to buy pencils, paper, charcoal and prints, the elder for tennis-shoes, marbles, twine, and pocket-knives. Madame Descoings’s passion forced her to be content with fifty francs a month for domestic expenses so she could gamble with the rest.

Madame Bridau, by motherly love, kept her expenses down to the same sum. By way of penance for her former overconfidence, she heroically cut off her little enjoyments. As with other timid souls of limited intelligence, one shock roused her distrust and she exaggerated a defect until it assumed the consistency of a virtue. The Emperor, she said to herself, might forget them; he might die in battle; her pension ceased with her life. She shuddered at the risk her children ran of being left alone without means. Quite incapable of understanding Roguin when he explained that in seven years Madame Descoings’s assignment would replace the money she had sold out of the Funds, she persisted in trusting neither the notary nor her aunt, nor even the government; she believed only in herself and the privations she practiced. By laying aside three thousand francs every year from her pension she would have thirty thousand at the end of ten years, which would give fifteen hundred a year to her children. At thirty-six she might expect to live twenty years longer; and if she kept to the same system she might leave each child enough for bare necessities.

Thus the two widows passed from hollow opulence to voluntary poverty—one under the pressure of a vice, the other through the promptings of the purest virtue. None of these petty details are useless in teaching the lesson of this history, drawn from the commonplace interests of life but whose bearings are perhaps more widespread. The view from the windows into the student dens; the tumult of the rapins below; the necessity of looking up at the sky to escape the miserable sights of the damp angle of the street; the presence of that portrait, full of soul and grandeur despite the workmanship of an amateur; the sight of rich colors, now old and harmonious, in that calm home; the mother’s preference for her eldest child; her opposition to the younger’s tastes; in short, the body of facts and circumstances that preface this history are perhaps the generating causes to which we owe Joseph Bridau, one of the greatest painters of the modern French school.

Philippe, the elder son, strikingly resembled his mother. Though a blond lad with blue eyes, he had the daring look readily taken for intrepidity and courage. Old Claparon, who entered the ministry with Bridau and was one of the faithful whist players with the widows, used to say, tapping Philippe’s cheek, “Here’s a young rascal who’ll stand to his guns!” The boy, thus stimulated, naturally assumed a resolute manner. That turn once given to his character, he became very adroit at bodily exercises; his fights at the Lyceum taught him endurance and contempt for pain, which lay the foundation of military valor. He also acquired, naturally, a distaste for study; public education failed to develop body and mind pari passu.

Agathe believed that the physical resemblance between Philippe and herself carried a moral likeness; she confidently expected him to show her own delicacy of feeling heightened by manly vigor. Philippe was fifteen when the family moved to the rue Mazarin; the winning ways of a lad of that age confirmed maternal belief. Joseph, three years younger, was like his father, but only on the defective side. His thick black hair was always in disorder; Philippe’s, despite vivacity, was invariably neat. By some fatality Joseph could not keep his clothes clean; dress him in new clothes and he made them look old. The elder took care of his things out of vanity. Unconsciously, Agathe acquired the habit of scolding Joseph and holding up his brother as an example. She did not treat them alike; when she fetched them from school the thought about Joseph always was, “What sort of state shall I find him in?” These trifles drove her into maternal preference.

No one among the ordinary circle—neither old Du Bruel nor Claparon, nor Desroches the father, nor even the Abbé Loraux, Agathe’s confessor—noticed Joseph’s faculty for observation. Absorbed in his own tastes, the future colorist paid no attention to anything concerning himself. During childhood this disposition was so like torpor that his father feared he might suffer hydrocephalus. His face, whose originality was thought ugliness by those without an eye for the moral value of a countenance, wore a sullen expression in childhood. The features, which developed later, were pinched, and the close attention Joseph paid to what went on about him contracted them further. Philippe flattered his mother’s vanity, but Joseph won no compliments. Philippe sparkled with clever sayings and lively answers that lead parents to believe their boys will turn out remarkable men; Joseph was taciturn, a dreamer. The mother hoped great things of Philippe, and expected nothing of Joseph.

Joseph’s predilection for art began with a commonplace incident. During the Easter holidays of 1812, coming from a walk in the Tuileries with his brother and Madame Descoings, he saw a pupil drawing a caricature of a professor on the wall of the Institute and stopped in admiration at the charcoal sketch, full of satire. The next day he stood at the window watching pupils enter the building by the rue Mazarin door; then he slipped into the long courtyard of the Institute, full of statues, busts, half-finished marbles, plasters, and baked clays; at all of which he gazed feverishly—his instinct awakened, his vocation stirred. He entered a ground-floor room with a half-open door and saw a dozen young men drawing from a statue, who at once began to make fun of him.

“Hi! little one,” cried the first, taking crumbs of his bread and scattering them at the child.

“Whose child is he?”

“Goodness, how ugly!”

For a quarter of an hour Joseph stood and bore much teasing in Chaudet’s atelier. But after laughing at him the pupils were struck by his persistency and expression. They asked what he wanted. Joseph answered he wished to learn to draw; they encouraged him. Won by this friendliness, the child told them he was Madame Bridau’s son.

“Oh! if you are Madame Bridau’s son,” they cried, “you will certainly be a great man. Long live the son of Madame Bridau! Is your mother pretty? If you are a sample of her, she must be stylish!”

“Ha! you want to be an artist?” said the eldest pupil, coming up to Joseph, “but don’t you know that requires pluck; you’ll have to bear all sorts of trials—enough to break your legs and arms and soul and body. All the fellows you see here have gone through ordeals. That one, for instance, he went seven days without eating! Let me see if you can be an artist.”

He took one of the child’s arms and stretched it straight up; then placed the other as if Joseph were delivering a blow.

“Now that’s what we call the telegraph trial,” said the pupil. “If you can stand like that without lowering or changing position for a quarter of an hour, then you’ll have proved yourself a plucky one.”

“Courage, little one, courage!” cried the rest. “You must suffer if you want to be an artist.”

Joseph, with the good faith of thirteen, stood motionless for five minutes, all the pupils gazing solemnly. “There! you are moving,” cried one. “Steady, steady, confound you!” cried another. “The Emperor Napoleon stood a whole month as you see him there,” said a third, pointing to a fine Chaudet statue in the room representing the Emperor with the Imperial sceptre, which had been torn down in 1814 from the column it surmounted.

At the end of ten minutes sweat stood on Joseph’s forehead. At that moment a bald-headed little man, pale and sickly, entered; respectful silence reigned.

“What are you about, you urchins?” he exclaimed as he looked at the youthful martyr.

“That is a good little fellow, who is posing,” said the tall pupil.

“Are you not ashamed to torture a poor child in that way?” said Chaudet, lowering Joseph’s arms and giving him a friendly pat. “How long have you been standing there?”

“A quarter of an hour.”

“What brought you here?”

“I want to be an artist.”

“Where do you belong? where do you come from?”

“From mamma’s house.”

“Oh! mamma!” cried the pupils.

“Silence at the easels!” cried Chaudet. “Who is your mamma?”

“She is Madame Bridau. My papa, who is dead, was a friend of the Emperor; and if you will teach me to draw, the Emperor will pay all you ask for it.”

“His father was head of a department at the ministry of the Interior,” Chaudet said, struck by recollection. “So you want to be an artist, at your age?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Well, come here just as much as you like; we’ll amuse you. Give him a board, paper, and chalks, and let him alone. You are to know, you young scamps, that his father did me a service. Here, Corde-a-puits, go and get some cakes and sugar-plums,” he said to the pupil who had tormented Joseph, giving him small change. “We’ll see if you are to be artist by the way you gobble the dainties,” added the sculptor, chucking Joseph under the chin.

Then he went round examining the pupils’ works, followed by the child, who looked and listened and tried to understand. The sweets were brought—Chaudet, the child, and the studio all had their teeth in them; Joseph was petted as much as he had been teased. The rough play and real heart of artists revealed themselves, and the scene impressed his mind. The apparition of the sculptor—for whom the Emperor’s protection opened a way to future glory, closed soon after by premature death—was like a vision to little Joseph. He told his mother nothing of this adventure, but he spent two hours every Sunday and Thursday in Chaudet’s atelier. From then Madame Descoings, who humored the cherubim’s fancies, kept Joseph supplied with pencils, red chalks, prints and drawing-paper. At school the future colorist sketched his masters, drew comrades, charcoal-sketched dormitories, and showed surprising assiduity in the drawing-class. Lemire, the drawing-master, struck by the lad’s inclination and progress, told Madame Bridau of her son’s faculty. Agathe, like a true provincial who knows little of art, was terrified. When Lemire left her, she burst into tears.

“Ah!” she cried to Madame Descoings, “what is to become of me! Joseph, whom I meant to make a government clerk, whose career was marked out at the ministry of the interior, where, protected by his father’s memory, he might have risen to be chief of a division before twenty-five, he wants to be a painter—a vagabond! I always knew that child would give me nothing but trouble.”

Madame Descoings confessed she had encouraged Joseph’s passion for months, aiding his Sunday and Thursday visits to the Institute. At the Salon, to which she had taken him, the boy’s interest in pictures had been, she declared, miraculous.

“If he understands painting at thirteen,” she said, “your Joseph will be a man of genius.”

“Yes; and see what genius did for his father—killed him with overwork at forty!”

At the close of autumn, as Joseph entered his fourteenth year, Agathe, contrary to Madame Descoings’s entreaties, went to see Chaudet and requested he cease to debauch her son. She found the sculptor in a blue smock, modelling his last statue; he received the widow of the man who had once served him rather roughly; but already at death’s door, he was working with passionate ardor to accomplish in hours what he might have done in months. As Madame Bridau entered, he had just found an effect long sought and was handling tools and clay with spasmodic jerks that seemed to the ignorant Agathe like those of a maniac. At any other time Chaudet would have laughed; but now, hearing the mother bewail the destiny he had opened to her child, abusing art and insisting Joseph be barred from the atelier, he burst into holy wrath.

“I was under obligations to your deceased husband, I wished to help his son, to watch his first steps in the noblest of careers,” he cried. “Yes, madame, learn, if you do not know it, that a great artist is a king, and more than a king; he is happier, independent, he lives as he likes, he reigns in the world of fancy. Your son has a glorious future before him. Faculties like his are rare; they are only disclosed at his age in such beings as Giottos, Raphaels, Titians, Rubens, Murillos—for, in my opinion, he will make a better painter than sculptor. God of heaven! if I had such a son, I should be as happy as the Emperor is to have given himself the King of Rome. Well, you are mistress of your child’s fate. Go your own way, madame; make him a fool, a miserable quill-driver, tie him to a desk, and you’ve murdered him! But I hope, in spite of all your efforts, that he will stay an artist. A true vocation is stronger than obstacles. Vocation! the very word means a call, the election of God himself! You will make your child unhappy, that’s all.” He flung the clay he no longer needed into a tub and said to his model, “That will do for to-day.”

Agathe raised her eyes and saw, in a corner where her glance had not before penetrated, a nude woman sitting on a stool; the sight drove her away horrified.

“You are not to have the little Bridau here any more,” Chaudet said to pupils, “it annoys his mother.”

“Eugh!” they cried as Agathe closed the door.

No sooner did the students learn Madame Bridau did not wish her son to be an artist than their whole happiness centered on getting Joseph among them. In spite of a promise not to go to the Institute, the child often slipped into Regnauld the painter’s studio, where he was encouraged to daub canvas. When the widow complained the bargain was not kept, Chaudet’s pupils assured her Regnauld was not Chaudet and they hadn’t the bringing up of her son, with other impertinences; the scamps composed a song of a hundred and thirty-seven couplets on Madame Bridau.

That evening Agathe refused to play at cards and sat on her sofa plunged in grief, tears in her handsome eyes.

“What is the matter, Madame Bridau?” asked old Claparon.

“She thinks her boy will have to beg his bread because he has got the bump of painting,” said Madame Descoings; “but I am not uneasy about the future of my step-son, little Bixiou, who has a passion for drawing. Men are born to get on.”

“You are right,” said the severe Desroches, who, despite talent, had never risen beyond assistant-head of a department. “Happily I have only one son; otherwise, with my eighteen hundred francs, and a wife who makes barely twelve hundred from her stamped-paper office, I don’t know what would become of me. I have just placed my boy as under-clerk to a lawyer; he gets twenty-five francs a month and his breakfast. I give him as much more, and he dines and sleeps at home. That’s all he gets; he must manage for himself, but he’ll make his way. I keep the fellow harder at work than if he were at school, and some day he will be a barrister. When I give him money to go to the theatre, he is as happy as a king and kisses me. Oh, I keep a tight hand on him, and he renders me an account of all he spends. You are too good to your children, Madame Bridau; if your son wants hardships and privations, let him; they’ll make a man of him.”

“As for my boy,” said Du Bruel, a retired chief of a division, “he is only sixteen; his mother dotes on him; but I wouldn’t listen to his choosing a profession at his age—a mere fancy that may pass. Boys should be guided and controlled.”

“Ah, monsieur! you are rich, you are a man, and you have but one son,” said Agathe.

“Faith!” said Claparon, “children do tyrannize over us—over our hearts, I mean. Mine makes me furious; he has nearly ruined me, and now I won’t have anything to do with him—it’s a sort of independence. Well, he is the happier for it, and so am I. That fellow was partly the cause of his mother’s death. He chose to be a commercial traveller; and the trade suited him, for he was no sooner in the house than he wanted to be out; he couldn’t keep in one place and wouldn’t learn. All I ask of God is that I may die before he dishonors my name. Those without children lose many pleasures, but they escape great sufferings.”

“And these men are fathers!” thought Agathe, weeping anew.

“What I am trying to show you, my dear Madame Bridau, is that you had better let your boy be a painter; if not, you will only waste your time.”

“If you could coerce him,” said the sour Desroches, “I should advise you to oppose his tastes; but weak as I see you are, you had better let him daub if he likes.”

“Console yourself, Agathe,” said Madame Descoings, “Joseph will turn out a great man.”

After this discussion the widow’s friends united in one advice, which did not relieve her anxieties. They advised her to let Joseph follow his bent.

“If he doesn’t turn out a genius,” said Du Bruel, who always sought to please Agathe, “you can then get him into some government office.”

When Madame Descoings accompanied the old clerks to the door she assured them at the head of the stairs that they were “Grecian sages.”

“Madame Bridau ought to be glad her son is willing to do anything,” said Claparon.

“Besides,” said Desroches, “if God preserves the Emperor, Joseph will always be looked after. Why should she worry?”

“She is timid about everything concerning her children,” answered Madame Descoings. “Well, my good girl,” she said returning to Agathe, “you see they are unanimous; why are you still crying?”

“If it was Philippe, I should have no anxiety. But you don’t know what goes on in that atelier; they have naked women!”

“I hope they keep good fires,” said Madame Descoings.

A few days after this, the disasters of the retreat from Moscow became known. Napoleon returned to Paris to organize fresh troops and to ask further sacrifices from the country. The poor mother was then plunged into different anxieties. Philippe, tired of school, wanted to serve the Emperor; he saw a review at the Tuileries—the last Napoleon ever held—and became infatuated with a soldier’s life. In those days military splendor, the show of uniforms, the authority of epaulets, offered irresistible seductions to a certain style of youth. Philippe thought he had the same vocation for the army that his brother showed for art. Without his mother’s knowledge he wrote a petition to the Emperor:

Sire,—I am the son of your Bridau; eighteen years of age, five feet six inches; I have good legs, a good constitution, and wish to be one of your soldiers. I ask you to let me enter the army, etc.

Within twenty-four hours the Emperor had sent Philippe to the Imperial Lyceum at Saint-Cyr, and six months later, in November 1813, appointed him sub-lieutenant in a cavalry regiment. Philippe spent most of that winter in cantonments, but as soon as he knew to ride he was dispatched to the front and went eagerly. During the campaign in France he was made a lieutenant after an outpost affair where his bravery saved his colonel’s life. The Emperor named him captain at La Fere-Champenoise and took him on his staff. Inspired by such promotion, Philippe won the cross at Montereau. He witnessed Napoleon’s farewell at Fontainebleau, raved at the sight, and refused to serve the Bourbons. When he returned in July 1814, he found his mother ruined.

Joseph’s scholarship was withdrawn after the holidays, and Madame Bridau, whose pension came from the Emperor’s privy purse, vainly entreated that it be inscribed on the ministry rolls. Joseph, more of a painter than ever, was delighted and entreated his mother to let him go to Monsieur Regnauld, promising to earn his own living. He declared he was sufficiently advanced in the second class to get on without rhetoric. Philippe, a captain at nineteen and decorated, who had served the Emperor as aide-de-camp in two battles, flattered the mother’s vanity immensely. Coarse and blustering, without real merit beyond cavalry bravery, he was to her a man of genius; whereas Joseph, puny and sickly, with unkempt hair and absent mind, seeking peace and dreaming of an artist’s glory, would only bring her worries.

The winter of 1814-1815 was lucky for Joseph. Secretly encouraged by Madame Descoings and Bixiou, a pupil of Gros, he worked in that celebrated atelier, whence much talent issued, and there formed a close intimacy with Schinner. The return from Elba came; Captain Bridau joined the Emperor at Lyons, accompanied him to the Tuileries, and was appointed to command a squadron in the Guard’s dragoons. After Waterloo—where he was slightly wounded and won the officer’s Legion of Honor—he happened to be near Marshal Davoust at Saint-Denis and was not with the Loire army. Consequently, and through Davoust’s intercession, his cross and rank were secured though he was placed on half-pay.

Joseph, anxious about his future, studied through this period with an ardor that several times made him ill amid these tumultuous events.

“It is the smell of the paints,” Agathe said to Madame Descoings. “He ought to give up a business so injurious to his health.”

However, all Agathe’s anxieties were for her lieutenant-colonel son. When she saw him again in 1816, reduced from a nine-thousand-franc commander’s salary to a half-pay of three hundred francs a month, she fitted up attic rooms for him and spent her savings. Philippe was one of the faithful Bonapartes of the cafe Lemblin, that constitutional Boeotia; he acquired habits, manners, style, and life of a half-pay officer; like any young man of twenty-one he exaggerated them, vowed mortal enmity to the Bourbons, never reported to the War Department, and refused opportunities offered for infantry employ with his rank. In his mother’s eyes, Philippe seemed to display noble character.

“The father himself could have done no more,” she said.

Philippe’s half-pay sufficed him; he cost nothing at home, whereas all Joseph’s expenses were paid by the two widows. From that moment Agathe’s preference for Philippe was openly shown. Up to that time it had been secret; but the persecution of this faithful servant of the Emperor, the recollection of his wound, his courage in adversity—which, voluntary though it was, seemed a glorious adversity—drew forth Agathe’s tenderness. The single sentence “He is unfortunate” explained and justified everything. Joseph himself—with the simplicity abundant in the artist-soul in its opening years, and brought up to admire his big brother—so far from being hurt by maternal preference, encouraged it by sharing her worship of the hero who had carried Napoleon’s orders on two battlefields and was wounded at Waterloo. How could he doubt the superiority of the grand brother whom he had seen in the green and gold uniform of the Guard’s dragoons commanding his squadron on the Champ de Mars?

Agathe, notwithstanding this preference, was an excellent mother. She loved Joseph, though not blindly; she simply could not understand him. Joseph adored his mother; Philippe let his mother adore him. Towards her the dragoon softened his military brutality, but he never concealed the contempt he felt for Joseph—expressed, however, in a friendly way. When he looked at his brother, weak and sickly at seventeen, shrunken by toil and over-weighted with his powerful head, he nicknamed him “Cub.” Philippe’s patronizing manners would have wounded anyone less carelessly indifferent than the artist, who believed soldiers hid goodness beneath a brutal exterior. Joseph did not yet know that soldiers of genius are as gentle and courteous as other superior men. All genius is alike.

“Poor boy!” said Philippe to his mother, “we mustn’t plague him; let him do as he likes.”

To his mother’s eyes the colonel’s contempt was a mark of fraternal affection.

“Philippe will always love and protect his brother,” she thought.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In 1816, Joseph obtained his mother’s permission to convert the garret adjoining his attic room into an atelier, and Madame Descoings gave him a little money for the indispensable requirements of the painter’s trade; in the minds of the two widows, the art of painting was nothing but a trade. With the feeling and ardor of his vocation, the lad himself arranged his humble atelier. Madame Descoings persuaded the owner of the house to put a skylight in the roof. The garret was turned into a vast hall painted in chocolate-color by Joseph himself. On the walls he hung a few sketches. Agathe contributed, not without reluctance, an iron stove; so that her son might be able to work at home, without, however, abandoning the studio of Gros, nor that of Schinner.

The constitutional party, supported chiefly by officers on half-pay and the Bonapartists, were at this time inciting “emeutes” around the Chamber of Deputies, on behalf of the Charter, though no one actually wanted it. Several conspiracies were brewing. Philippe, who dabbled in them, was arrested, and then released for want of proof; but the minister of war cut short his half-pay by putting him on the active list,—a step which might be called a form of discipline. France was no longer safe; Philippe was liable to fall into some trap laid for him by spies,—provocative agents, as they were called, being much talked of in those days.

While Philippe played billiards in disaffected cafes, losing his time and acquiring the habit of wetting his whistle with “little glasses” of all sorts of liquors, Agathe lived in mortal terror for the safety of the great man of the family. The Grecian sages were too much accustomed to wend their nightly way up Madame Bridau’s staircase, finding the two widows ready and waiting, and hearing from them all the news of their day, ever to break up the habit of coming to the green salon for their game of cards. The ministry of the interior, though purged of its former employes in 1816, had retained Claparon, one of those cautious men, who whisper the news of the “Moniteur,” adding invariably, “Don’t quote me.” Desroches, who had retired from active service some time after old Du Bruel, was still battling for his pension. The three friends, who were witnesses of Agathe’s distress, advised her to send the colonel to travel in foreign countries.

“They talk about conspiracies, and your son, with his disposition, will be certain to fall a victim in some of them; there is plenty of treachery in these days.”

“Philippe is cut from the wood the Emperor made into marshals,” said Du Bruel, in a low voice, looking cautiously about him; “and he mustn’t give up his profession. Let him serve in the East, in India—”

“Think of his health,” said Agathe.

“Why doesn’t he get some place, or business?” said old Desroches; “there are plenty of private offices to be had. I am going as head of a bureau in an insurance company, as soon as I have got my pension.”

“Philippe is a soldier; he would not like to be any thing else,” said the warlike Agathe.

“Then he ought to have the sense to ask for employment—”

“And serve these others!” cried the widow. “Oh! I will never give him that advice.”

“You are wrong,” said Du Bruel. “My son has just got an appointment through the Duc de Navarreins. The Bourbons are very good to those who are sincere in rallying to them. Your son could be appointed lieutenant-colonel to a regiment.”

“They only appoint nobles in the cavalry. Philippe would never rise to be a colonel,” said Madame Descoings.

Agathe, much alarmed, entreated Philippe to travel abroad, and put himself at the service of some foreign power who, she thought, would gladly welcome a staff officer of the Emperor.

“Serve a foreign nation!” cried Philippe, with horror.

Agathe kissed her son with enthusiasm.

“His father all over!” she exclaimed.

“He is right,” said Joseph. “France is too proud of her heroes to let them be heroic elsewhere. Napoleon may return once more.”

However, to satisfy his mother, Philippe took up the dazzling idea of joining General Lallemand in the United States, and helping him to found what was called the Champ d’Asile, one of the most disastrous swindles that ever appeared under the name of national subscription. Agathe gave ten thousand francs to start her son, and she went to Havre to see him off. By the end of 1817, she had accustomed herself to live on the six hundred francs a year which remained to her from her property in the Funds; then, by a lucky chance, she made a good investment of the ten thousand francs she still kept of her savings, from which she obtained an interest of seven per cent. Joseph wished to emulate his mother’s devotion. He dressed like a bailiff; wore the commonest shoes and blue stockings; denied himself gloves, and burned charcoal; he lived on bread and milk and Brie cheese. The poor lad got no sympathy, except from Madame Descoings, and from Bixiou, his student-friend and comrade, who was then making those admirable caricatures of his, and filling a small office in the ministry.

“With what joy I welcomed the summer of 1818!” said Joseph Bridau in after-years, relating his troubles; “the sun saved me the cost of charcoal.”

As good a colorist by this time as Gros himself, Joseph now went to his master for consultation only. He was already meditating a tilt against classical traditions, and Grecian conventionalities, in short, against the leading-strings which held down an art to which Nature as she is belongs, in the omnipotence of her creations and her imagery. Joseph made ready for a struggle which, from the day when he first exhibited in the Salon, has never ceased. It was a terrible year. Roguin, the notary of Madame Descoings and Madame Bridau, absconded with the moneys held back for seven years from Madame Descoings’s annuity, which by that time were producing two thousand francs a year. Three days after this disaster, a bill of exchange for a thousand francs, drawn by Philippe upon his mother, arrived from New York. The poor fellow, misled like so many others, had lost his all in the Champ d’Asile. A letter, which accompanied the bill, drove Agathe, Joseph, and the Descoings to tears, and told of debts contracted in New York, where his comrades in misfortunes had indorsed for him.

“It was I who made him go!” cried the poor mother, eager to divert the blame from Philippe.

“I advise you not to send him on many such journeys,” said the old Descoings to her niece.

Madame Descoings was heroic. She continued to give the three thousand francs a year to Madame Bridau, but she still paid the dues on her trey which had never turned up since the year 1799. About this time, she began to doubt the honesty of the government, and declared it was capable of keeping the three numbers in the urn, so as to excite the shareholders to put in enormous stakes. After a rapid survey of all their resources, it seemed to the two women impossible to raise the thousand francs without selling out the little that remained in the Funds. They talked of pawning their silver and part of the linen, and even the needless pieces of furniture. Joseph, alarmed at these suggestions, went to see Gerard and told him their circumstances. The great painter obtained an order from the household of the king for two copies of a portrait of Louis XVIII., at five hundred francs each. Though not naturally generous, Gros took his pupil to an artist-furnishing house and fitted him out with the necessary materials. But the thousand francs could not be had till the copies were delivered, so Joseph painted four panels in ten days, sold them to the dealers and brought his mother the thousand francs with which to meet the bill of exchange when it fell due. Eight days later, came a letter from the colonel, informing his mother that he was about to return to France on board a packet from New York, whose captain had trusted him for the passage-money. Philippe announced that he should need at least a thousand francs on his arrival at Havre.

“Good,” said Joseph to his mother, “I shall have finished my copies by that time, and you can carry him the money.”

“Dear Joseph!” cried Agathe in tears, kissing his son, “God will bless you. You do love him, then, poor persecuted fellow? He is indeed our glory and our hope for the future. So young, so brave, so unfortunate! everything is against him; we three must always stand by him.”

“You see now that painting is good for something,” cried Joseph, overjoyed to have won his mother’s permission to be a great artist.

Madame Bridau rushed to meet her beloved son, Colonel Philippe, at Havre. Once there, she walked every day beyond the round tower built by Francois I., to look out for the American packet, enduring the keenest anxieties. Mothers alone know how such sufferings quicken maternal love. The vessel arrived on a fine morning in October, 1819, without delay, and having met with no mishap. The sight of a mother and the air of one’s native land produces a certain affect on the coarsest nature, especially after the miseries of a sea-voyage. Philippe gave way to a rush of feeling, which made Agathe think to herself, “Ah! how he loves me!” Alas, the hero loved but one person in the world, and that person was Colonel Philippe. His misfortunes in Texas, his stay in New York,—a place where speculation and individualism are carried to the highest pitch, where the brutality of self-interest attains to cynicism, where man, essentially isolated, is compelled to push his way for himself and by himself, where politeness does not exist,—in fact, even the minor events of Philippe’s journey had developed in him the worst traits of an old campaigner: he had grown brutal, selfish, rude; he drank and smoked to excess; physical hardships and poverty had depraved him. Moreover, he considered himself persecuted; and the effect of that idea is to make persons who are unintelligent persecutors and bigots themselves. To Philippe’s conception of life, the universe began at his head and ended at his feet, and the sun shone for him alone. The things he had seen in New York, interpreted by his practical nature, carried away his last scruples on the score of morality. For such beings, there are but two ways of existence. Either they believe, or they do not believe; they have the virtues of honest men, or they give themselves up to the demands of necessity; in which case they proceed to turn their slightest interests and each passing impulse of their passions into necessities.

Such a system of life carries a man a long way. It was only in appearance that Colonel Philippe retained the frankness, plain-dealing, and easy-going freedom of a soldier. This made him, in reality, very dangerous; he seemed as guileless as a child, but, thinking only of himself, he never did anything without reflecting what he had better do,—like a wily lawyer planning some trick “a la Maitre Gonin”; words cost him nothing, and he said as many as he could to get people to believe. If, unfortunately, some one refused to accept the explanations with which he justified the contradictions between his conduct and his professions, the colonel, who was a good shot and could defy the most adroit fencing-master, and possessed the coolness of one to whom life is indifferent, was quite ready to demand satisfaction for the first sharp word; and when a man shows himself prepared for violence there is little more to be said. His imposing stature had taken on a certain rotundity, his face was bronzed from exposure in Texas, he was still succinct in speech, and had acquired the decisive tone of a man obliged to make himself feared among the populations of a new world. Thus developed, plainly dressed, his body trained to endurance by his recent hardships, Philippe in the eyes of his mother was a hero; in point of fact, he had simply become what people (not to mince matters) call a blackguard.

Shocked at the destitution of her cherished son, Madame Bridau bought him a complete outfit of clothes at Havre. After listening to the tale of his woes, she had not the heart to stop his drinking and eating and amusing himself as a man just returned from the Champ d’Asile was likely to eat and drink and divert himself. It was certainly a fine conception,—that of conquering Texas with the remains of the imperial army. The failure was less in the idea than in the men who conceived it; for Texas is to-day a republic, with a future full of promise. This scheme of Liberalism under the Restoration distinctly proves that the interests of the party were purely selfish and not national, seeking power and nothing else. Neither men, nor occasion, nor cause, nor devotion were lacking; only the money and the support of the hypocritical party at home who dispensed enormous sums, but gave nothing when it came to recovering empire. Household managers like Agathe have a plain common-sense which enables them to perceive such political chicane: the poor woman saw the truth through the lines of her son’s tale; for she had read, in the exile’s interests, all the pompous editorials of the constitutional journals, and watched the management of the famous subscription, which produced barely one hundred and fifty thousand francs when it ought to have yielded five or six millions. The Liberal leaders soon found out that they were playing into the hands of Louis XVIII. by exporting the glorious remnants of our grand army, and they promptly abandoned to their fate the most devoted, the most ardent, the most enthusiastic of its heroes,—those, in short, who had gone in the advance. Agathe was never able, however, to make her son see that he was more duped than persecuted. With blind belief in her idol, she supposed herself ignorant, and deplored, as Philippe did, the evil times which had done him such wrong. Up to this time he was, to her mind, throughout his misfortunes, less faulty than victimized by his noble nature, his energy, the fall of the Emperor, the duplicity of the Liberals, and the rancor of the Bourbons against the Bonapartists. During the week at Havre, a week which was horribly costly, she dared not ask him to make terms with the royal government and apply to the minister of war. She had hard work to get him away from Havre, where living is very expensive, and to bring him back to Paris before her money gave out. Madame Descoings and Joseph, who were awaiting their arrival in the courtyard of the coach-office of the Messageries Royales, were struck with the change in Agathe’s face.

“Your mother has aged ten years in two months,” whispered the Descoings to Joseph, as they all embraced, and the two trunks were being handed down.

“How do you do, mere Descoings?” was the cool greeting the colonel bestowed on the old woman whom Joseph was in the habit of calling “maman Descoings.”

“I have no money to pay for a hackney-coach,” said Agathe, in a sad voice.

“I have,” replied the young painter. “What a splendid color Philippe has turned!” he cried, looking at his brother.

“Yes, I’ve browned like a pipe,” said Philippe. “But as for you, you’re not a bit changed, little man.”

Joseph, who was now twenty-one, and much thought of by the friends who had stood by him in his days of trial, felt his own strength and was aware of his talent; he represented the art of painting in a circle of young men whose lives were devoted to science, letters, politics, and philosophy. Consequently, he was wounded by his brother’s contempt, which Philippe still further emphasized with a gesture, pulling his ears as if he were still a child. Agathe noticed the coolness which succeeded the first glow of tenderness on the part of Joseph and Madame Descoings; but she hastened to tell them of Philippe’s sufferings in exile, and so lessened it. Madame Descoings, wishing to make a festival of the return of the prodigal, as she called him under her breath, had prepared one of her good dinners, to which old Claparon and the elder Desroches were invited. All the family friends were to come, and did come, in the evening. Joseph had invited Leon Giraud, d’Arthez, Michel Chrestien, Fulgence Ridal, and Horace Bianchon, his friends of the fraternity. Madame Descoings had promised Bixiou, her so-called step-son, that the young people should play at ecarte. Desroches the younger, who had now taken, under his father’s stern rule, his degree at law, was also of the party. Du Bruel, Claparon, Desroches, and the Abbe Loraux carefully observed the returned exile, whose manners and coarse features, and voice roughened by the abuse of liquors, together with his vulgar glance and phraseology, alarmed them not a little. While Joseph was placing the card-tables, the more intimate of the family friends surrounded Agathe and asked,—

“What do you intend to make of Philippe?”

“I don’t know,” she answered, “but he is determined not to serve the Bourbons.”

“Then it will be very difficult for you to find him a place in France. If he won’t re-enter the army, he can’t be readily got into government employ,” said old Du Bruel. “And you have only to listen to him to see he could never, like my son, make his fortune by writing plays.”

The motion of Agathe’s eyes, with which alone she replied to this speech, showed how anxious Philippe’s future made her; they all kept silence. The exile himself, Bixiou, and the younger Desroches were playing at ecarte, a game which was then the rage.

“Maman Descoings, my brother has no money to play with,” whispered Joseph in the good woman’s ear.

The devotee of the Royal Lottery fetched twenty francs and gave them to the artist, who slipped them secretly into his brother’s hand. All the company were now assembled. There were two tables of boston; and the party grew lively. Philippe proved a bad player: after winning for awhile, he began to lose; and by eleven o’clock he owed fifty francs to young Desroches and to Bixiou. The racket and the disputes at the ecarte table resounded more than once in the ears of the more peaceful boston players, who were watching Philippe surreptitiously. The exile showed such signs of bad temper that in his final dispute with the younger Desroches, who was none too amiable himself, the elder Desroches joined in, and though his son was decidedly in the right, he declared he was in the wrong, and forbade him to play any more. Madame Descoings did the same with her grandson, who was beginning to let fly certain witticisms; and although Philippe, so far, had not understood him, there was always a chance that one of the barbed arrows might piece the colonel’s thick skull and put the sharp jester in peril.

“You must be tired,” whispered Agathe in Philippe’s ear; “come to bed.”

“Travel educates youth,” said Bixiou, grinning, when Madame Bridau and the colonel had disappeared.

Joseph, who got up at dawn and went to bed early, did not see the end of the party. The next morning Agathe and Madame Descoings, while preparing breakfast, could not help remarking that soires would be terribly expensive if Philippe were to go on playing that sort of game, as the Descoings phrased it. The worthy old woman, then seventy-six years of age, proposed to sell her furniture, give up her appartement on the second floor (which the owner was only too glad to occupy), and take Agathe’s parlor for her chamber, making the other room a sitting-room and dining-room for the family. In this way they could save seven hundred francs a year; which would enable them to give Philippe fifty francs a month until he could find something to do. Agathe accepted the sacrifice. When the colonel came down and his mother had asked how he liked his little bedroom, the two widows explained to him the situation of the family. Madame Descoings and Agathe possessed, by putting all their resources together, an income of five thousand three hundred francs, four thousand of which belonged to Madame Descoings and were merely a life annuity. The Descoings made an allowance of six hundred a year to Bixiou, whom she had acknowledged as her grandson during the last few months, also six hundred to Joseph; the rest of her income, together with that of Agathe, was spent for the household wants. All their savings were by this time eaten up.

“Make yourselves easy,” said the lieutenant-colonel. “I’ll find a situation and put you to no expense; all I need for the present is board and lodging.”

Agathe kissed her son, and Madame Descoings slipped a hundred francs into his hand to pay for his losses of the night before. In ten days the furniture was sold, the appartement given up, and the change in Agathe’s domestic arrangements accomplished with a celerity seldom seen outside of Paris. During those ten days, Philippe regularly decamped after breakfast, came back for dinner, was off again for the evening, and only got home about midnight to go to bed. He contracted certain habits half mechanically, and they soon became rooted in him; he got his boots blacked on the Pont Neuf for the two sous it would have cost him to go by the Pont des Arts to the Palais-Royal, where he consumed regularly two glasses of brandy while reading the newspapers,—an occupation which employed him till midday; after that he sauntered along the rue Vivienne to the cafe Minerve, where the Liberals congregated, and where he played at billiards with a number of old comrades. While winning and losing, Philippe swallowed four or five more glasses of divers liquors, and smoked ten or a dozen cigars in going and coming, and idling along the streets. In the evening, after consuming a few pipes at the Hollandais smoking-rooms, he would go to some gambling-place towards ten o’clock at night. The waiter handed him a card and a pin; he always inquired of certain well-seasoned players about the chances of the red or the black, and staked ten francs when the lucky moment seemed to come; never playing more than three times, win or lose. If he won, which usually happened, he drank a tumbler of punch and went home to his garret; but by that time he talked of smashing the ultras and the Bourbon body-guard, and trolled out, as he mounted the staircase, “We watch to save the Empire!” His poor mother, hearing him, used to think “How gay Philippe is to-night!” and then she would creep up and kiss him, without complaining of the fetid odors of the punch, and the brandy, and the pipes.

“You ought to be satisfied with me, my dear mother,” he said, towards the end of January; “I lead the most regular of lives.”

The colonel had dined five times at a restaurant with some of his army comrades. These old soldiers were quite frank with each other on the state of their own affairs, all the while talking of certain hopes which they based on the building of a submarine vessel, expected to bring about the deliverance of the Emperor. Among these former comrades, Philippe particularly liked an old captain of the dragoons of the Guard, named Giroudeau, in whose company he had seen his first service. This friendship with the late dragoon led Philippe into completing what Rabelais called “the devil’s equipage”; and he added to his drams, and his tobacco, and his play, a “fourth wheel.”

One evening at the beginning of February, Giroudeau took Philippe after dinner to the Gaite, occupying a free box sent to a theatrical journal belonging to his nephew Finot, in whose office Giroudeau was cashier and secretary. Both were dressed after the fashion of the Bonapartist officers who now belonged to the Constitutional Opposition; they wore ample overcoats with square collars, buttoned to the chin and coming down to their heels, and decorated with the rosette of the Legion of honor; and they carried malacca canes with loaded knobs, which they held by strings of braided leather. The late troopers had just (to use one of their own expressions) “made a bout of it,” and were mutually unbosoming their hearts as they entered the box. Through the fumes of a certain number of bottles and various glasses of various liquors, Giroudeau pointed out to Philippe a plump and agile little ballet-girl whom he called Florentine, whose good graces and affection, together with the box, belonged to him as the representative of an all-powerful journal.

“But,” said Philippe, “I should like to know how far her good graces go for such an iron-gray old trooper as you.”

“Thank God,” replied Giroudeau, “I’ve stuck to the traditions of our glorious uniform. I have never wasted a farthing upon a woman in my life.”

“What’s that?” said Philippe, putting a finger on his left eye.

“That is so,” answered Giroudeau. “But, between ourselves, the newspaper counts for a good deal. To-morrow, in a couple of lines, we shall advise the managers to let Mademoiselle Florentine dance a particular step, and so forth. Faith, my dear boy, I’m uncommonly lucky!”

“Well!” thought Philippe; “if this worthy Giroudeau, with a skull as polished as my knee, forty-eight years, a big stomach, a face like a ploughman, and a nose like a potato, can get a ballet-girl, I ought to be the lover of the first actress in Paris. Where does one find such luck?” he said aloud.

“I’ll show you Florentine’s place to-night. My Dulcinea only earns fifty francs a month at the theatre,” added Giroudeau, “but she is very prettily set up, thanks to an old silk dealer named Cardot, who gives her five hundred francs a month.”

“Well, but—?” exclaimed the jealous Philippe.

“Bah!” said Giroudeau; “true love is blind.”

When the play was over Giroudeau took Philippe to Mademoiselle Florentine’s appartement, which was close to the theatre, in the rue de Crussol.

“We must behave ourselves,” said Giroudeau. “Florentine’s mother is here. You see, I haven’t the means to pay for one, so the worthy woman is really her own mother. She used to be a concierge, but she’s not without intelligence. Call her Madame; she makes a point of it.”

Florentine happened that night to have a friend with her,—a certain Marie Godeschal, beautiful as an angel, cold as a danseuse, and a pupil of Vestris, who foretold for her a great choregraphic destiny. Mademoiselle Godeschal, anxious to make her first appearance at the Panorama-Dramatique under the name of Mariette, based her hopes on the protection and influence of a first gentleman of the bedchamber, to whom Vestris had promised to introduce her. Vestris, still green himself at this period, did not think his pupil sufficiently trained to risk the introduction. The ambitious girl did, in the end, make her pseudonym of Mariette famous; and the motive of her ambition, it must be said, was praiseworthy. She had a brother, a clerk in Derville’s law office. Left orphans and very poor, and devoted to each other, the brother and sister had seen life such as it is in Paris. The one wished to be a lawyer that he might support his sister, and he lived on ten sous a day; the other had coldly resolved to be a dancer, and to profit by her beauty as much as by her legs that she might buy a practice for her brother. Outside of their feeling for each other, and of their mutual life and interests, everything was to them, as it once was to the Romans and the Hebrews, barbaric, outlandish, and hostile. This generous affection, which nothing ever lessened, explained Mariette to those who knew her intimately.

The brother and sister were living at this time on the eighth floor of a house in the Vieille rue du Temple. Mariette had begun her studies when she was ten years old; she was now just sixteen. Alas! for want of becoming clothes, her beauty, hidden under a coarse shawl, dressed in calico, and ill-kept, could only be guessed by those Parisians who devote themselves to hunting grisettes and the quest of beauty in misfortune, as she trotted past them with mincing step, mounted on iron pattens. Philippe fell in love with Mariette. To Mariette, Philippe was commander of the dragoons of the Guard, a staff-officer of the Emperor, a young man of twenty-seven, and above all, the means of proving herself superior to Florentine by the evident superiority of Philippe over Giroudeau. Florentine and Giroudeau, the one to promote his comrade’s happiness, the other to get a protector for her friend, pushed Philippe and Mariette into a “mariage en detrempe,”—a Parisian term which is equivalent to “morganatic marriage,” as applied to royal personages. Philippe when they left the house revealed his poverty to Giroudeau, but the old roue reassured him.

“I’ll speak to my nephew Finot,” he said. “You see, Philippe, the reign of phrases and quill-drivers is upon us; we may as well submit. To-day, scribblers are paramount. Ink has ousted gunpowder, and talk takes the place of shot. After all, these little toads of editors are pretty good fellows, and very clever. Come and see me to-morrow at the newspaper office; by that time I shall have said a word for you to my nephew. Before long you’ll have a place on some journal or other. Mariette, who is taking you at this moment (don’t deceive yourself) because she literally has nothing, no engagement, no chance of appearing on the stage, and I have told her that you are going on a newspaper like myself,—Mariette will try to make you believe she is loving you for yourself; and you will believe her! Do as I do,—keep her as long as you can. I was so much in love with Florentine that I begged Finot to write her up and help her to a debut; but my nephew replied, ‘You say she has talent; well, the day after her first appearance she will turn her back on you.’ Oh, that’s Finot all over! You’ll find him a knowing one.”

The next day, about four o’clock, Philippe went to the rue de Sentier, where he found Giroudeau in the entresol,—caged like a wild beast in a sort of hen-coop with a sliding panel; in which was a little stove, a little table, two little chairs, and some little logs of wood. This establishment bore the magic words, SUBSCRIPTION OFFICE, painted on the door in black letters, and the word “Cashier,” written by hand and fastened to the grating of the cage. Along the wall that lay opposite to the cage, was a bench, where, at this moment, a one-armed man was breakfasting, who was called Coloquinte by Giroudeau, doubtless from the Egyptian colors of his skin.

“A pretty hole!” exclaimed Philippe, looking round the room. “In the name of thunder! what are you doing here, you who charged with poor Colonel Chabert at Eylau? You—a gallant officer!”

“Well, yes! broum! broum!—a gallant officer keeping the accounts of a little newspaper,” said Giroudeau, settling his black silk skull-cap. “Moreover, I’m the working editor of all that rubbish,” he added, pointing to the newspaper itself.

“And I, who went to Egypt, I’m obliged to stamp it,” said the one-armed man.

“Hold your tongue, Coloquinte,” said Giroudeau. “You are in presence of a hero who carried the Emperor’s orders at the battle of Montereau.”

Coloquinte saluted. “That’s were I lost my missing arm!” he said.

“Coloquinte, look after the den. I’m going up to see my nephew.”

The two soldiers mounted to the fourth floor, where, in an attic room at the end of a passage, they found a young man with a cold light eye, lying on a dirty sofa. The representative of the press did not stir, though he offered cigars to his uncle and his uncle’s friend.

“My good fellow,” said Giroudeau in a soothing and humble tone, “this is the gallant cavalry officer of the Imperial Guard of whom I spoke to you.”

“Eh! well?” said Finot, eyeing Philippe, who, like Giroudeau, lost all his assurance before the diplomatist of the press.

“My dear boy,” said Giroudeau, trying to pose as an uncle, “the colonel has just returned from Texas.”

“Ah! you were taken in by that affair of the Champ d’Asile, were you? Seems to me you were rather young to turn into a Soldier-laborer.”

The bitterness of this jest will only be understood by those who remember the deluge of engravings, screens, clocks, bronzes, and plaster-casts produced by the idea of the Soldier-laborer, a splendid image of Napoleon and his heroes, which afterwards made its appearance on the stage in vaudevilles. That idea, however, obtained a national subscription; and we still find, in the depths of the provinces, old wallpapers which bear the effigy of the Soldier-laborer. If this young man had not been Giroudeau’s nephew, Philippe would have boxed his ears.

“Yes, I was taken in by it; I lost my time, and twelve thousand francs to boot,” answered Philippe, trying to force a grin.

“You are still fond of the Emperor?” asked Finot.

“He is my god,” answered Philippe Bridau.

“You are a Liberal?”

“I shall always belong to the Constitutional Opposition. Oh Foy! oh Manuel! oh Laffitte! what men they are! They’ll rid us of these others,—these wretches, who came back to France at the heels of the enemy.”

“Well,” said Finot coldly, “you ought to make something out of your misfortunes; for you are the victim of the Liberals, my good fellow. Stay a Liberal, if you really value your opinions, but threaten the party with the follies in Texas which you are ready to show up. You never got a farthing of the national subscription, did you? Well, then you hold a fine position: demand an account of that subscription. I’ll tell you how you can do it. A new Opposition journal is just starting, under the auspices of the deputies of the Left; you shall be the cashier, with a salary of three thousand francs. A permanent place. All you want is some one to go security for you in twenty thousand francs; find that, and you shall be installed within a week. I’ll advise the Liberals to silence you by giving you the place. Meantime, talk, threaten,—threaten loudly.”

Giroudeau let Philippe, who was profuse in his thanks, go down a few steps before him, and then he turned back to say to his nephew, “Well, you are a queer fellow! you keep me here on twelve hundred francs—”

“That journal won’t live a year,” said Finot. “I’ve got something better for you.”

“Thunder!” cried Philippe to Giroudeau. “He’s no fool, that nephew of yours. I never once thought of making something, as he calls it, out of my position.”

That night at the cafe Lemblin and the cafe Minerve Colonel Philippe fulminated against the Liberal party, which had raised subscriptions, sent heroes to Texas, talked hypocritically of Soldier-laborers, and left them to starve, after taking the money they had put into it, and keeping them in exile for two years.

“I am going to demand an account of the moneys collected by the subscription for the Champ d’Asile,” he said to one of the frequenters of the cafe, who repeated it to the journalists of the Left.

Philippe did not go back to the rue Mazarin; he went to Mariette and told her of his forthcoming appointment on a newspaper with ten thousand subscribers, in which her choregraphic claims should be warmly advanced.

Agathe and Madame Descoings waited up for Philippe in fear and trembling, for the Duc de Berry had just been assassinated. The colonel came home a few minutes after breakfast; and when his mother showed her uneasiness at his absence, he grew angry and asked if he were not of age.

“In the name of thunder, what’s all this! here have I brought you some good news, and you both look like tombstones. The Duc de Berry is dead, is he?—well, so much the better! that’s one the less, at any rate. As for me, I am to be cashier of a newspaper, with a salary of three thousand francs, and there you are, out of all your anxieties on my account.”

“Is it possible?” cried Agathe.

“Yes; provided you can go security for me in twenty thousand francs; you need only deposit your shares in the Funds, you will draw the interest all the same.”

The two widows, who for nearly two months had been desperately anxious to find out what Philippe was about, and how he could be provided for, were so overjoyed at this prospect that they gave no thought to their other catastrophes. That evening, the Grecian sages, old Du Bruel, Claparon, whose health was failing, and the inflexible Desroches were unanimous; they all advised Madame Bridau to go security for her son. The new journal, which fortunately was started before the assassination of the Duc de Berry, just escaped the blow which Monsieur Decazes then launched at the press. Madame Bridau’s shares in the Funds, representing thirteen hundred francs’ interest, were transferred as security for Philippe, who was then appointed cashier. That good son at once promised to pay one hundred francs every month to the two widows, for his board and lodging, and was declared by both to be the best of sons. Those who had thought ill of him now congratulated Agathe.

“We were unjust to him,” they said.

Poor Joseph, not to be behind his brother in generosity, resolved to pay for his own support, and succeeded.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER IV

Three months later, the colonel, who ate and drank enough for four, found fault with the food and compelled the poor widows, on the score of his payments, to spend much on their table, had not yet paid a penny. His mother and Madame Descoings, out of delicacy, would not remind him of his promise. The year passed without one of those coins Leon Gozlan so vigorously called “tigers with five claws” finding its way from Philippe’s pocket to the household purse. He quieted his conscience by seldom dining at home.

“Well, he is happy,” said his mother; “he is easy in mind; he has a place.”

Through the influence of a feuilleton edited by Vernou, a friend of Bixiou, Finot, and Giroudeau, Mariette appeared, not at the Panorama-Dramatique but at the Porte-Saint-Martin, where she triumphed beside the famous Begrand. Among the directors was a rich and luxurious general officer, in love with an actress, for whose sake he had made himself an impresario. In Paris, men are often so fascinated with actresses, singers, or ballet-dancers that they become theatre directors out of love. This officer knew Philippe and Giroudeau. Mariette’s first appearance, heralded by Finot’s journal and by Philippe, was promptly arranged by the three officers; there seems to be solidarity among the passions in folly.

The mischievous Bixiou was not long in revealing to his grandmother and the devoted Agathe that Philippe, the cashier, the hero of heroes, was in love with Mariette, the celebrated ballet-dancer at the Porte-Saint-Martin. The news was a thunder-clap to the two widows; Agathe’s religious principles taught her that women on the stage were brands in the burning; she and Madame Descoings thought women of that kind dined off gold, drank pearls, and wasted fortunes.

“Now do you suppose,” said Joseph to his mother, “that my brother is such a fool as to spend his money on Mariette? Such women only ruin rich men.”

“They talk of engaging Mariette at the Opera,” said Bixiou. “Don’t be worried, Madame Bridau; the diplomatic body often comes to the Porte-Saint-Martin, and that handsome girl won’t stay long with your son. I heard an ambassador was madly in love with her. By the bye, another piece of news! Old Claparon is dead, and his son, who has become a banker, has ordered the cheapest kind of funeral for him. That fellow has no education; they wouldn’t behave like that in China.”

Philippe, prompted by mercenary motives, proposed marriage to Mariette; but she, knowing herself on the eve of an engagement at the Grand Opera, refused, either because she guessed the colonel’s motive or because she saw how important independence would be to her fortune. For the remainder of the year Philippe came home no more than twice a month. Where was he? Either at his office, the theatre, or with Mariette. No light as to his conduct reached the household of the rue Mazarin. Giroudeau, Finot, Bixiou, Vernou, Lousteau saw him leading a life of pleasure. Philippe shared the gay amusements of Tullia, a leading singer at the Opera, of Florentine, who took Mariette’s place at the Porte-Saint-Martin, of Florine and Matifat, Coralie and Camusot. After four o’clock, when he left his office, until midnight, he amused himself; some party had usually been arranged the night before—a good dinner, a card-party, a supper by some one of the set. Philippe was in his element.

This carnival, which lasted eighteen months, was not altogether without troubles. The beautiful Mariette no sooner appeared at the Opera in January, 1821, than she captured one of the most distinguished dukes of Louis XVIII’s court. Philippe tried to make head against the peer, and by April, compelled by his passion and despite some luck at cards, he dipped into the funds he was cashier of. By May he had taken eleven hundred francs. In that fatal month Mariette started for London to see what could be done with the lords while the temporary opera house in the Hotel Choiseul, rue Lepelletier, was being prepared. The luckless Philippe had ended, as often happens, in loving Mariette despite her infidelities; she herself had never thought him anything but a dull-minded, brutal soldier, the first rung of a ladder she had never intended to remain on. Foreseeing the time when Philippe would have spent all his money, she captured other journalistic support which released her from depending on him; nevertheless, she felt the peculiar gratitude that that class of women acknowledge towards the first man who smooths their way among the difficulties and horrors of a theatrical career.

Forced to let his terrible mistress go to London without him, Philippe went into winter quarters, as he called it—returned to his attic room in his mother’s appartement. He made gloomy reflections as he went to bed and when he rose. He was conscious of the inability to live otherwise than he had for the last year. The luxury that surrounded Mariette—the dinners, the suppers, the evenings in the side-scenes, the animation of wits and journalists, the racket around him, the delights that tickled his senses and vanity—such a life, found only in Paris, offering daily the charm of something new, was now more than habit—it had become to Philippe as necessary as his tobacco or brandy. He saw plainly that he could not live without these continual enjoyments. The idea of suicide came into his head; not on account of the deficit which must soon be discovered, but because he could no longer live without Mariette’s atmosphere of pleasure. Full of gloomy thoughts, he entered his brother’s painting-room for the first time, where he found Joseph in a blue blouse, copying a picture for a dealer.

“So that’s how pictures are made,” said Philippe, by way of opening.

“No,” said Joseph, “that is how they are copied.”

“How much do they pay you for that?”

“Eh! never enough; two hundred and fifty francs. But I study the manner of the masters and learn much; I found out the secrets of their method. There’s one of my own pictures,” he added, pointing to a sketch with colors still moist.

“How much do you pocket in a year?”

“Unfortunately, I am known only to painters. Schinner backs me; he has got me work at the Chateau de Presles, where I am going in October to do arabesques, panels, and other decorations, for which the Comte de Serizy, no doubt, will pay well. With such trifles and with orders from the dealers, I may manage to earn eighteen hundred to two thousand francs a year over and above expenses. I shall send that picture to the next exhibition; if it hits the public taste, my fortune is made. My friends think well of it.”

“I don’t know anything about such things,” said Philippe in a subdued voice, causing Joseph to look at him.

“What is the matter?” the artist asked, seeing Philippe very pale.

“I should like to know how long it would take you to paint my portrait.”

“If I worked steadily, and the weather were clear, I could finish in three or four days.”

“That’s too long; I have only one day. My poor mother loves me so much I wished to leave her my likeness. We will say no more.”

“Why! are you going away again?”

“I am going never to return,” replied Philippe with forced gaiety.

“Look here, Philippe, what is the matter? If it is anything serious, I am a man and not a ninny. I am used to hard struggles, and if discretion is needed, I have it.”

“Are you sure?”

“On my honor.”

“You will tell no one, no matter who?”

“No one.”

“Well, I am going to blow my brains out.”

“You!—are you going to fight a duel?”

“I am going to kill myself.”

“Why?”

“I have taken eleven hundred francs from the funds in my hands; I must send in my accounts tomorrow. Half my security is lost; our poor mother will be reduced to six hundred francs a year. That would be nothing! I could make a fortune for her later; but I am dishonored! I cannot live under dishonor—”

“You will not be dishonored if it is paid back. To be sure, you will lose your place and only have the five hundred francs a year from your cross, but you can live on five hundred francs.”

“Farewell!” said Philippe, running downstairs and not waiting for another word.

Joseph left his studio and went down to breakfast with his mother; Philippe’s confession had taken away his appetite. He took Madame Descoings aside and told her the terrible news. The old woman made a frightened exclamation, let fall the saucepan of milk she held, and flung herself into a chair. Agathe rushed in; from one exclamation to another the mother gathered the fatal truth.

“He! to fail in honor! the son of Bridau to take the money that was trusted to him!”

The widow trembled; her eyes dilated and then grew fixed; she sat down and burst into tears.

“Where is he?” she cried amid sobs. “Perhaps he has flung himself into the Seine.”

“You must not give up hope,” said Madame Descoings, “because a poor lad has met a bad woman who led him to do wrong. Dear me! we see that every day. Philippe has had such misfortunes! he had so little chance to be happy and loved that we ought not to be surprised at his passion for that creature. All passions lead to excess. My own life is not without reproach of that kind, and yet I call myself an honest woman. A single fault is not vice; and after all, it is only those who do nothing that are never deceived.”

Agathe’s despair overcame her so much that Joseph and the Descoings had to lessen Philippe’s wrong-doing by assuring her such things happened in all families.

“But he is twenty-eight years old,” cried Agathe, “he is no longer a child.”

Terrible revelation of the poor woman’s inward thought about her son’s conduct.

“Mother, I assure you he thought only of your sufferings and of the wrong he had done you,” said Joseph.

“Oh, my God! let him come back to me, let him live, and I will forgive all,” cried the poor mother, who pictured Philippe dragged dead out of the river.

Gloomy silence reigned a short time. The day passed with cruel alternations of hope and fear; all three ran to the window at the least sound and gave way to every sort of conjecture. While the family grieved, Philippe was quietly getting matters in order at his office. He had the audacity to submit accounts with a statement that, fearing some accident, he had retained eleven hundred francs at his house for safe keeping. The scoundrel left the office at five, taking five hundred francs more from the desk, and coolly went to a gambling-house he had avoided since his paper connection, for a cashier must not be seen frequenting such places. The fellow was not wanting in acumen. His past conduct showed he derived more from his grandfather Rouget than from his virtuous sire Bridau. Perhaps he might have made a good general; but in private life he was one of those scoundrels who shelter their schemes behind a screen of strict legality and the privacy of the family roof.

At this conjuncture Philippe maintained his coolness. He won at first and gained as much as six thousand francs; but he let himself be dazzled by the idea of getting out of his difficulties at one stroke. He left the trente-et-quarante, hearing that the black had come up sixteen times at roulette, and was about to put five thousand francs on the red when the black came for the seventeenth time. The colonel then put a thousand francs on the black and won. In spite of this luck, his head grew weary; he felt it, though he continued to play. But that divining sense which leads a gambler comes in flashes and began failing him. Intermittent perceptions, fatal to gamblers, set in. Lucidity of mind, like the rays of the sun, can have no effect except by continuity; it can divine only if not breaking that line; the curvettings of chance bemuddle it. Philippe lost all. After such a strain, the careless mind as well as the bravest weakens. When Philippe went home that night he was not thinking of suicide; he had never really meant to kill himself; he no longer thought of his lost place, nor of the sacrificed security, nor of his mother, nor of Mariette, the cause of his ruin; he walked along mechanically. When he got home, his mother in tears, Madame Descoings and Joseph all fell on his neck and kissed him and brought him to a seat by the fire.

“Bless me!” thought he, “the threat has worked.”

The brute at once assumed an air suitable to the occasion; the more easily because his ill-luck at cards had deeply depressed him. Seeing her atrocious Benjamin so pale and woe-begone, the poor mother knelt beside him, kissed his hands, pressed them to her heart, and gazed at him for a long time with eyes swimming in tears.

“Philippe,” she said in a choking voice, “promise not to kill yourself, and all shall be forgotten.”

Philippe looked at his sorrowing brother and at Madame Descoings, whose eyes were full of tears, and thought, “They are good creatures.” Then he took his mother in his arms, raised her and put her on his knee, pressed her to his heart and whispered as he kissed her, “For the second time, you give me life.”

The Descoings managed to serve an excellent dinner and add two bottles of old wine with a little “liqueur des iles,” a treasure left from her former business.

“Agathe,” she said at dessert, “we must let him smoke his cigars,” and she offered some to Philippe.

These two poor creatures fancied that if they let him take his ease he would like his home and stay; both tried to endure his tobacco-smoke, though each loathed it. That sacrifice was not so much noticed by Philippe.

On the morrow Agathe looked ten years older. Her terrors calmed, reflection returned, and the poor woman had not closed an eye through that horrible night. She was now reduced to six hundred francs a year. Madame Descoings, like all fat women fond of good eating, was growing heavy; her step on the staircase sounded like chopping logs; she might die at any moment; with her life, four thousand francs would disappear. What folly to rely on that resource! What should she do? What would become of them? With her mind made up to become a sick-nurse rather than be supported by her children, Agathe did not think of herself. But Philippe—what would he do if reduced to live on the five hundred francs of a Legion of Honor officer? During the past eleven years Madame Descoings, by giving up three thousand francs a year, had paid her debt twice, yet she still sacrificed her grandson’s interests to the Bridau family. Though Agathe’s honorable feelings were shocked by this disaster, she said to herself: “Poor boy! is it his fault? He is faithful to his oath. I have done wrong not to marry him. If I had found him a wife, he would not have entangled with this danseuse. He has such a vigorous constitution—”

Madame Descoings had likewise reflected on saving the family honor. At daybreak she went to her friend’s room.

“Neither you nor Philippe should manage this delicate matter,” she urged. “Our two old friends Du Bruel and Claparon are dead, but we still have Desroches, who is very sagacious. I’ll go see him this morning. He can tell the newspaper people that Philippe trusted a friend and has been made a victim; that his weakness makes him unfit to be a cashier; what happened may happen again, and that Philippe prefers to resign. That will prevent his being turned off.”

Agathe, seeing this lie would save her son’s honor in others’ eyes, kissed Madame Descoings, who went out early to finish the dreadful affair.

Philippe, meanwhile, had slept the sleep of the just. “She is sly, that old woman,” he remarked when his mother explained why breakfast was late.

Old Desroches, the last remaining friend of these two poor women, who despite his harsh nature never forgot that Bridau had obtained his place, fulfilled like a diplomat the mission Madame Descoings had confided to him. He dined that evening with the family and notified Agathe she must go the next day to the Treasury, rue Vivienne, sign the transfer of funds involved, and obtain a coupon for the six hundred francs a year that remained to her. The old clerk did not leave without obliging Philippe to sign a petition to the minister of war asking for reinstatement in the active army. Desroches promised to follow the petition at the war office, and to profit by the triumph of a duke over Philippe in the matter of the danseuse to obtain that nobleman’s influence.

“Philippe will be lieutenant-colonel in the Duc de Maufrigneuse’s regiment within three months,” he declared, “and you will be rid of him.”

Desroches went away smothered with blessings from the two poor widows and Joseph. As to the newspaper, it ceased to exist in two months, just as Finot predicted. Philippe’s crime had, so far as the world knew, no consequences. But Agathe’s motherhood had received a deadly wound. Her belief in her son once shaken, she lived in perpetual fear, mingled with some satisfactions as she saw her worst apprehensions unrealized.

When men like Philippe, endowed with physical courage yet cowardly and ignoble morally, see things resume their course after a catastrophe in which honor is almost lost, family kindness or friendliness is a premium of encouragement. They count on impunity; their minds distorted, their passions gratified, they study how they succeeded in getting round social laws; the result is they become alarmingly adroit.

A fortnight later Philippe, once more a man of leisure, lazy and bored, renewed his fatal café life—drams, long billiard games with punch, nightly resort to the gambling-table where he risked trifling stakes and won enough to pay his dissipations. Apparently very economical, the better to deceive his mother and Madame Descoings, he wore a greasy hat with the nap rubbed off, patched boots, a shabby overcoat on which the red ribbon scarcely showed so discolored and dirty, his buckskin gloves greenish, and he gave up his satin neckcloth only when ragged enough to look like wadding. Mariette was the sole object of his love, and her treachery had greatly hardened his heart. When he won more than usual, or supped with Giroudeau, he followed some Venus of the slums with brutal contempt for the whole sex. Otherwise regular in his habits, he breakfasted and dined at home and came in about one o’clock. Three months of this life restored Agathe to some confidence.

As for Joseph, working at the splendid picture that later brought him fame, he lived in his atelier. On Bixiou’s prediction, Madame Descoings believed in Joseph’s future glory and showed him every motherly kindness; she took his breakfast, ran errands, blacked his boots. The painter was never seen till dinner-time, and his evenings were spent at the Cenacle among friends. He read much and gave himself the deep education that comes through the mind itself, which men of talent seek between twenty and thirty. Agathe, seeing little of Joseph and feeling no uneasiness, lived only for Philippe, who gave her alternations of fear and relief necessary to maternity. Desroches, who came once a week, gave her hopes. The Duc de Maufrigneuse had asked to have Philippe in his regiment; the minister of war had ordered an inquiry; and as Bridau’s name did not appear on any police list nor at the Palais de Justice, Philippe would be reinstated early in the coming year.

To this result Desroches set all his influence in motion. At the prefecture of police he learned Philippe spent his evenings gambling and thought best to tell this privately to Madame Descoings, exhorting her to keep an eye on the lieutenant-colonel, for one outbreak would imperil all; as it was, the minister of war was not likely to inquire whether Philippe gambled. Once restored under the flag, he might abandon a vice taken up from idleness. Agathe, who no longer received friends, sat in the chimney-corner reading her prayers, while Madame Descoings consulted the cards, interpreted dreams, and applied the rules of the “cabala” to her lottery ventures. This jovial fanatic never missed a drawing; she still pursued her trey—which never turned up. It was nearly twenty-one years old, just approaching majority; on this ridiculous idea she pinned her faith. One of its three numbers had stayed at the bottom of all wheels since the lottery’s institution. Accordingly Madame Descoings laid heavy stakes on that number and on all combinations of the three numbers. The last mattress of her bed was where she stored savings; she unsewed the ticking, put in bits of gold saved from her needs, wrapped them in wool, and sewed the mattress up again. She intended, at the last drawing, to risk all her savings on the different combinations of her treasured trey.

This passion, so universally condemned, has never been fairly studied. No one has understood this opium of poverty. The lottery, all-powerful fairy of the poor, bestowed the gift of magic hopes. The turn of the wheel which opens to the gambler a vista of gold and happiness lasts no longer than a flash, but the lottery gave five days’ existence to that flash. What social power today, for five sous, gives us five days’ happiness and launches us ideally into all the joys of civilization? Tobacco, a craving far more immoral than play, destroys the body, attacks the mind, and stupefies a nation; while the lottery did none of that. This passion was forced to keep within limits by the long periods between drawings and by the choice of wheels each investor clung to. Madame Descoings never staked on any but the “wheel of Paris.” Full of confidence that the trey cherished for twenty-one years was about to triumph, she imposed enormous privations to stake a large sum on the last drawing. When she dreamed cabalistic visions (not all corresponding to lottery numbers), she told Joseph, who alone would listen and not scold her but soothe her follies with kindly words. All great talents respect and understand a real passion; they explain it to themselves by finding its roots in their own hearts. Joseph’s idea was that his brother loved tobacco and liquors, Maman Descoings loved her trey, his mother loved God, Desroches the younger loved lawsuits, Desroches the elder loved angling—in short, all the world loved something. He himself loved the “beau idéal” in all things; he loved Byron’s poetry, Gericault’s painting, Rossini’s music, Walter Scott’s novels. “Everyone to his taste, maman,” he would say; “but your trey does hang fire terribly.”

“It will turn up, and you will be rich, and my little Bixiou as well.”

“Give it all to your grandson,” cried Joseph; “at any rate, do what you like with it.”

“Hey! when it turns up I shall have enough for everybody. In the first place, you shall have a fine atelier; you sha’n’t deprive yourself of going to the opera so as to pay for your models and colors. Do you know, my dear boy, you make me play a pretty shabby part in that picture of yours?”

By way of economy, Joseph had made the Descoings pose for his magnificent painting of a young courtesan taken by an old woman to a Doge of Venice. This picture, one of the masterpieces of modern painting, was mistaken by Gros himself for a Titian, and paved the way for recognition Joseph received in the Salon of 1823.

“Those who know you know very well what you are,” he answered gayly. “Why need you trouble about those who don’t know you?”

For the last ten years Madame Descoings had taken on the ripe tints of a russet apple at Easter. Wrinkles had formed in her superabundant flesh, now pallid and flabby. Her eyes, full of life, were bright with thoughts still young and vivacious, and might be considered grasping; there is always something of that spirit in a gambler. Her fat face bore traces of dissimulation and mental reservations hidden in her heart. Her vice necessitated secrecy. There were also indications of gluttony in the motion of her lips. Thus, although she was an excellent and upright woman, the eye might be misled by her appearance. She was an admirable model for the old woman Joseph wished to paint. Coralie, a young actress of exquisite beauty who died in youth, the mistress of Lucien de Rubempre, one of Joseph’s friends, had given him the idea of the picture. This noble painting has been called a plagiarism of other pictures, while in fact it was a splendid arrangement of three portraits. Michel Chrestien, one of his companions at the Cenacle, lent his republican head for the senator, to which Joseph added a few mature tints, just as he exaggerated Madame Descoings’s expression. This fine picture, destined to make a great noise and bring the artist much hatred, jealousy, and admiration, was just sketched out; but compelled to work for a living, he laid it aside to copy old masters for dealers; thus he penetrated their processes, and his brush is one of the best trained of the modern school. The shrewd sense of an artist led him to conceal profits he began to lay by from his mother and Madame Descoings, aware each had her road to ruin—the one in Philippe, the other in the lottery. This astuteness is seldom wanting among painters; busy for days in their studios, engaged in work which up to a point leaves the mind free, they are in some respects like women—their thoughts turn to the little events of life and they contrive to get at their hidden meaning.

Joseph had bought one of those magnificent chests or coffers of a past age, then ignored by fashion, with which he decorated a corner of his studio, where light danced upon the bas-reliefs and gave lustre to a masterpiece of sixteenth-century artisans. He saw the necessity for a hiding-place and had begun to accumulate a little store of money. With an artist’s carelessness, he put the sum he allowed for monthly expenses in a skull standing on one compartment of the coffer. Since his brother returned home, he found a constant discrepancy between the amount he spent and the sum in this receptacle. The hundred francs a month disappeared with incredible rapidity. Finding nothing one day when he had only spent forty or fifty francs, he remarked for the first time: “My money must have got wings.” The next month he paid more attention; but add as he might, like Robert Macaire, sixteen and five are twenty-three, he could make nothing of it. When, for the third time, he found a still more important discrepancy, he confided his painful suspicions to Madame Descoings, who loved him with a maternal, tender, confiding, enthusiastic love he had never had from his own mother—a love necessary to the early life of an artist. To her alone could he confide his horrible suspicions. He was as sure of his friends as of himself; and the Descoings, he knew, would take nothing to put in her lottery. At the idea that then suggested itself the poor woman wrung her hands. Philippe alone could have committed this domestic theft.

“Why didn’t he ask me, if he wanted it?” cried Joseph, stirring a dab of color into the palette without seeing what he did. “Is it likely I should refuse him?”

“It is robbing a child!” cried Madame Descoings, her face expressing deepest disgust.

“No,” replied Joseph, “he is my brother; my purse is his: but he ought to have asked me.”

“Put in a special sum, in silver, this morning, and don’t take anything out,” said Madame Descoings. “I shall know who goes into the studio; and if he is the only one, you will be certain it is he.”

The next day Joseph had proof of his brother’s forced loans upon him. Philippe came to the studio when Joseph was out and took the little sum he wanted. The artist trembled for his savings.

“I’ll catch him at it, the scamp!” he said, laughing, to Madame Descoings.

“And you’ll do right: we ought to break him of it. I, too, have missed little sums out of my purse. Poor boy! he wants tobacco; he’s accustomed to it.”

“Poor boy! poor boy!” cried the artist. “I’m rather of Fulgence and Bixiou’s opinion: Philippe is a dead-weight on us. He runs his head into riots and must be shipped to America, and that costs the mother twelve thousand francs; he can’t find anything to do in the forests, so he comes back and that costs twelve thousand more. Under pretense of delivering two words of Napoleon to a general, he thinks himself a great soldier and makes faces at the Bourbons; meanwhile, what does he do? amuse himself, travel, see foreign countries! As for me, I’m not duped by his misfortunes; he doesn’t look like a man who fails to get the best of things! Somebody finds him a good place, and there he is, leading the life of a Sardanapalus with a ballet-girl, and guzzling the funds of his journal; that costs the mother another twelve thousand francs! I don’t care two straws for myself, but Philippe will bring that poor woman to beggary. He thinks I’m of no account because I was never in the dragoons of the Guard; but perhaps I shall be the one to support that poor dear mother in her old age, while he, if he goes on as he does, will end I don’t know how. Bixiou often says to me, ‘He is a downright rogue, that brother of yours.’ Your grandson is right. Philippe will be up to some mischief that will compromise the honor of the family, and then we shall have to scrape up another ten or twelve thousand francs! He gambles every night; when he comes home, drunk as a templar, he drops on the staircase the pricked cards on which he marks the turns of red and black. Old Desroches is trying to get him back into the army, and, on my word, I believe he would hate to serve again. Would you ever have believed that a boy with such heavenly blue eyes and the look of Bayard could turn out such a scoundrel?”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER V

In spite of the coolness and discretion with which Philippe played his trifling game every night, it happened occasionally that he was what gamblers call “cleaned out.” Driven by the necessity of having his evening stake of ten francs, he plundered the household, laying hands on his brother’s money and on all that Madame Descoings or Agathe left about. Already the poor mother had had a dreadful vision in her first sleep: Philippe entered the room and took from the pockets of her gown all the money he could find. Agathe pretended to sleep, but she spent the rest of the night in tears. She saw the truth too clearly. “One wrong act is not a vice,” Madame Descoings had declared; but after so many repetitions, vice was unmistakable. Agathe could doubt no longer; her best-beloved son had neither delicacy nor honor.

On the morrow of that frightful vision, before Philippe left the house after breakfast, she drew him into her chamber and begged him, in a tone of entreaty, to ask her for what money he needed. After that, the applications were so numerous that in two weeks Agathe was drained of all her savings. She was literally without a penny, and began to think of finding work. The means of earning money had been discussed in the evenings between herself and Madame Descoings, and she had already taken patterns of worsted work to fill in from a shop called the “Pere de Famille,” an employment which pays about twenty sous a day. Notwithstanding Agathe’s silence, Madame Descoings guessed the motive of this desire. Her appearance changed: the fresh face had withered, the skin clung to the temples and cheek-bones, the forehead showed deep lines; her eyes lost their clearness; an inward fire consumed her; she wept most of the night. A chief cause of these ravages was the necessity of hiding her anguish. She never went to sleep until Philippe came in; she listened for his step, she had learned his voice’s inflections, the variations of his walk, the very language of his cane as it touched the pavement. Nothing escaped her. She knew the degree of his drunkenness, she trembled as she heard him stumble on the stairs; one night she picked up pieces of gold where he had fallen. When he had drunk and won, his voice was gruff and his cane dragged; when he had lost, his step had something sharp, short and angry about it; he hummed in a clear voice, and carried his cane in the air as if presenting arms. At breakfast, if he had won, his behavior was gay and affectionate; gloomy when he had lost, his brusque speech, hard glance, and depression frightened them. A life of debauch and the abuse of liquors debased, day by day, a once handsome countenance. The veins of the face swelled, the features grew coarse, the eyes lost their lashes and became hard and dry. No longer careful of his person, Philippe exhaled tavern miasmas and the smell of muddy boots, which stamped him with debauchery.

“You ought,” said Madame Descoings to Philippe during the last days of December, “to get yourself new-clothed from head to foot.”

“And who is to pay for it?” he answered sharply. “My poor mother hasn’t a sou; and I have five hundred francs a year. It would take my whole year’s pension to pay for the clothes; besides I have mortgaged it for three years--”

“What for?” asked Joseph.

“A debt of honor. Giroudeau borrowed a thousand francs from Florentine to lend me. I am not gorgeous, that’s a fact; but when one thinks that Napoleon is at Saint Helena, and has sold his plate for the means of living, his faithful soldiers can manage to walk on their bare feet,” he said, showing his boots without heels, as he marched away.

“He is not bad,” said Agathe, “he has good feelings.”

“You can love the Emperor and yet dress yourself properly,” said Joseph. “If he would take any care of himself and his clothes, he wouldn’t look so like a vagabond.”

“Joseph! you ought to have some indulgence for your brother,” cried Agathe. “You do the things you like, while he is certainly not in his right place.”

“What did he leave it for?” demanded Joseph. “What can it matter to him whether Louis the Eighteenth’s bugs or Napoleon’s cuckoos are on the flag, if it is the flag of his country? France is France! For my part, I’d paint for the devil. A soldier ought to fight, if he is a soldier, for the love of his art. If he had stayed quietly in the army, he would have been a general by this time.”

“You are unjust to him,” said Agathe, “your father, who adored the Emperor, would have approved of his conduct. However, he has consented to re-enter the army. God knows the grief it has caused your brother to do a thing he considers treachery.”

Joseph rose to return to his studio, but his mother took his hand and said:--

“Be good to your brother; he is so unfortunate.”

When the artist got back to his painting-room, followed by Madame Descoings, who begged him to humor his mother’s feelings and pointed out how changed she was, they found Philippe there, to their great amazement.

“Joseph, my boy,” he said, in an off-hand way, “I want some money. Confound it! I owe thirty francs for cigars at my tobacconist’s, and I dare not pass the cursed shop till I’ve paid it. I’ve promised to pay it a dozen times.”

“Well, I like your present way best,” said Joseph; “take what you want out of the skull.”

“I took all there was last night, after dinner.”

“There was forty-five francs.”

“Yes, that’s what I made it,” replied Philippe. “I took them; is there any objection?”

“No, my friend, no,” said Joseph. “If you were rich, I should do the same by you; only, before taking what I wanted, I should ask you if it were convenient.”

“It is very humiliating to ask,” remarked Philippe; “I would rather see you taking as I do, without a word; it shows more confidence. In the army, if a comrade dies, and has a good pair of boots, and you have a bad pair, you change, that’s all.”

“Yes, but you don’t take them while he is living.”

“Oh, what meanness!” said Philippe, shrugging. “Well, so you haven’t got any money?”

“No,” said Joseph, determined not to show his hiding-place.

“In a few days we shall be rich,” said Madame Descoings.

“Yes, you; you think your trey is going to turn up on the 25th at the Paris drawing. You must have put in a fine stake if you think you can make us all rich.”

“A paid-up trey of two hundred francs will give three millions, without counting the couplets and the singles.”

“At fifteen thousand times the stake--yes, you are right; it is just two hundred you must pay up!” cried Philippe.

Madame Descoings bit her lips; she knew she had spoken imprudently. In fact, Philippe asked himself as he went downstairs:--

“That old witch! where does she keep her money? It is as good as lost; I can make a better use of it. With four pools at fifty francs each, I could win two hundred thousand francs, and that’s much surer than the turning up of a trey.”

He tried to think where the old woman was likely to have hid the money. On festival days, Agathe went to church and stayed long; no doubt she confessed and prepared for communion. It was the day before Christmas; Madame Descoings would certainly go out to buy dainties for the reveillon and might also pay up her stake. The lottery was drawn every five days in different localities. The Paris lottery was drawn on the twenty-fifth of each month, and the lists closed on the twenty-fourth at midnight. Philippe studied these points and set himself to watch. He came home at midday; the Descoings had gone out and had taken the key of the appartement. But that was no difficulty. Philippe pretended to have forgotten something and asked the concierge to go herself and get a locksmith, who lived close by, and who came at once and opened the door. The villain’s first thought was the bed; he uncovered it, passed his hands over the mattress and at the lower end felt the pieces wrapped in paper. He at once ripped the ticking, picked out twenty napoleons, and then, without taking time to sew up the mattress, remade the bed neatly enough so Madame Descoings could suspect nothing.

The gambler stole off with a light foot, resolving to play at three different times, three hours apart, each time for only ten minutes. Thorough-going players, ever since 1786, when public gaming-houses were established, never played otherwise. But before reaching this experience they lost fortunes. The whole science of gambling-houses and their gains rests upon three things: the impassibility of the bank; drawn games, when half the money goes to the bank; and the notorious bad faith authorized by the government in refusing to hold or pay the player’s stakes except optionally. In a word, the gambling-house, which refuses the game of a rich and cool player, devours the fortune of the foolish and obstinate one, who is carried away by the rapid movement of the machinery of the game. The croupiers at “trente et quarante” move nearly as fast as the ball.

Philippe had ended by acquiring the sang-froid of a commanding general, which enabled him to keep his eye clear and his mind prompt in the midst of tumult. He had reached that statesmanship of gambling which in Paris is the livelihood of thousands who are strong enough to look every night into an abyss without getting vertigo. With his four hundred francs, Philippe resolved to make his fortune that day. He put aside, in his boots, two hundred francs, and kept the other two hundred in his pocket. At three o’clock he went to the gambling-house (now the theatre of the Palais-Royal), where the bank accepted the largest sums. He came out half an hour later with seven thousand francs in his pocket. Then he went to see Florentine, paid the five hundred francs he owed her, and proposed a supper at the Rocher de Cancale after the theatre. Returning to his game, along the rue de Sentier, he stopped at Giroudeau’s newspaper-office to notify him of the gala. By six o’clock Philippe had won twenty-five thousand francs, and stopped playing at the end of ten minutes as promised. That night, by ten o’clock, he had won seventy-five thousand francs. After the magnificent supper, Philippe, by then drunk and confident, went back to his play at midnight. In defiance of the rule he had imposed upon himself, he played for an hour and doubled his fortune. The bankers, from whom, by his system, he had extracted one hundred and fifty thousand francs, looked at him with curiosity.

“Will he go away now, or will he stay?” they said by a glance. “If he stays he is lost.”

Philippe thought he had struck a vein of luck, and stayed. Towards three in the morning, the hundred and fifty thousand francs had gone back to the bank. The colonel, who had imbibed considerable grog while playing, left in a drunken state, which the cold of the outer air only increased. A waiter from the gambling-house followed him, picked him up, and took him to one of those horrible houses at the door of which, on a hanging lamp, are the words: “Lodgings for the night.” The waiter paid for the ruined gambler, who was put to bed, where he remained till Christmas night. The managers of gambling-houses have some consideration for their customers, especially for high players. Philippe awoke about seven o’clock in the evening, his mouth parched, his face swollen, and in the grip of a nervous fever. The strength of his constitution enabled him to get home on foot, where meanwhile he had, without willing it, brought mourning, desolation, poverty, and death.

The evening before, when dinner was ready, Madame Descoings and Agathe expected Philippe. They waited dinner till seven. Agathe always went to bed at ten; but as she wished to be present at midnight mass, she went to lie down as soon as dinner was over. Madame Descoings and Joseph remained alone by the fire in the little salon, which served for all, and the old woman asked the painter to add up the amount of her great stake on the famous trey, which she was to pay that evening at the Lottery office. She wished to put in for the doubles and singles as well, to seize all chances. After feasting on the poetry of her hopes and pouring the two horns of plenty at the feet of her adopted son, and relating dreams which demonstrated the certainty of success, she felt no uneasiness other than the difficulty of bearing such joy and waiting from midnight until ten o’clock of the morrow, when the winning numbers were declared. Joseph, who saw nothing of the four hundred francs necessary to pay up the stakes, asked about them. The old woman smiled and led him into the former salon, now her bed-chamber.

“You shall see,” she said.

Madame Descoings hastily unmade the bed and searched for her scissors to rip the mattress; she put on her spectacles, looked at the ticking, saw the hole, and let fall the mattress. Hearing a sigh from the depths of the old woman’s breast, as though she were strangled by a rush of blood to the heart, Joseph instinctively held out his arms to catch the poor creature, and placed her fainting in a chair, calling to his mother to come. Agathe rose, slipped on her dressing-gown, and ran in. By the light of a candle, she applied the ordinary remedies—eau-de-cologne to the temples, cold water to the forehead, a burnt feather under the nose—and presently her aunt revived.

“They were there this morning; HE has taken them, the monster!” she said.

“Taken what?” asked Joseph.

“I had twenty louis in my mattress; my savings for two years; no one but Philippe could have taken them.”

“But when?” cried the poor mother, overwhelmed, “he has not been in since breakfast.”

“I wish I might be mistaken,” said the old woman. “But this morning in Joseph’s studio, when I spoke before Philippe of my stakes, I had a presentiment. I did wrong not to go down and take my little all and pay for my stakes at once. I meant to, and I don’t know what prevented me. Oh, yes!--my God! I went out to buy him some cigars.”

“But,” said Joseph, “you left the door locked. Besides, it is so infamous. I can’t believe it. Philippe couldn’t have watched you, cut open the mattress, done it deliberately,--no, no!”

“I felt them this morning, when I made my bed after breakfast,” repeated Madame Descoings.

Agathe, horrified, went downstairs and asked if Philippe had come in during the day. The concierge related the tale of his return and the locksmith. The mother, heart-stricken, went back a changed woman. White as her chemise, she walked as a spectre, slowly, noiselessly, moved by some superhuman power and yet mechanically. She held a candle whose light fell full upon her face and showed her eyes fixed with horror. Unconsciously, her hands had dishevelled the hair about her brow; this made her so beautiful with anguish that Joseph stood rooted in awe at the apparition of that remorse, the vision of that statue of terror and despair.

“My aunt,” she said, “take my silver forks and spoons. I have enough to make up the sum; I took your money for Philippe’s sake; I thought I could put it back before you missed it. Oh! I have suffered much.”

She sat down. Her dry, fixed eyes wandered a little.

“It was he who did it,” whispered the old woman to Joseph.

“No, no,” cried Agathe; “take my silver plate, sell it; it is useless to me; we can eat with yours.”

She went to her room, took the box which contained the plate, felt its light weight, opened it, and saw a pawnbroker’s ticket. The poor mother uttered a dreadful cry. Joseph and the Descoings ran to her, saw the empty box; her noble falsehood was of no avail. All three were silent and avoided looking at each other; but the next moment, by an almost frantic gesture, Agathe laid her finger on her lips as if to entreat a secrecy no one desired to break. They returned to the salon and sat beside the fire.

“Ah! my children,” cried Madame Descoings, “I am stabbed to the heart: my trey will turn up, I am certain of it. I am not thinking of myself, but of you two. Philippe is a monster,” she continued, addressing her niece; “he does not love you after all you have done for him. If you do not protect yourself against him he will bring you to beggary. Promise me to sell out your Funds and buy a life-annuity. Joseph has a good profession and he can live. If you will do this, dear Agathe, you will never be an expense to Joseph. Monsieur Desroches has just started his son as a notary; he would take your twelve thousand francs and pay you an annuity.”

Joseph seized his mother’s candlestick, rushed up to his studio, and came down with three hundred francs.

“Here, Madame Descoings!” he cried, giving her his little store, “it is no business of ours what you do with your money; we owe you what you have lost, and here it is, almost in full.”

“Take your poor little all?—the fruit of those privations that have made me so unhappy! are you mad, Joseph?” cried the old woman, torn between her faith in the coming trey and the sacrilege of accepting such a sacrifice.

“Oh! take it if you like,” said Agathe, moved to tears by this action of her true son.

Madame Descoings took Joseph by the head, and kissed him on the forehead:--

“My child,” she said, “don’t tempt me. I might only lose it. The lottery, you see, is all folly.”

No more heroic words were ever uttered in the hidden dramas of domestic life. It was, indeed, affection triumphant over inveterate vice. At this instant, the clocks struck midnight.

“It is too late now,” said Madame Descoings.

“Oh!” cried Joseph, “here are your cabalistic numbers.”

The artist sprang at the paper and rushed headlong down the staircase to pay the stakes. When he was no longer present, Agathe and Madame Descoings burst into tears.

“He has gone, the dear love,” cried the old gambler; “but it shall all be his; he pays his own money.”

Unhappily, Joseph did not know the way to any of the lottery-offices, which in those days were as well known to most people as the cigar-shops to a smoker in ours. The painter ran along, reading the street names on the lamps. When he asked passers-by to show him a lottery-office, he was told they were all closed, except the one under the portico of the Palais-Royal which was sometimes kept open a little later. He flew to the Palais-Royal: the office was shut.

“Two minutes earlier, and you might have paid your stake,” said one of the vendors of tickets under the portico, where he vociferated this singular cry: “Twelve hundred francs for forty sous,” and offered tickets all paid up.

By the glimmer of the street lamp and the lights of the cafe de la Rotonde, Joseph examined these tickets to see if any bore the Descoings’s numbers. He found none, and returned home grieved at having done his best in vain for the old woman, to whom he related his ill-luck. Agathe and her aunt went together to the midnight mass at Saint-Germain-des-Pres. Joseph went to bed. The collation did not take place. Madame Descoings had lost her head; and in Agathe’s heart was eternal mourning.

The two rose late on Christmas morning. Ten o’clock had struck before Madame Descoings began to bestir herself about breakfast, which was only ready at half-past eleven. At that hour, the oblong frames containing the winning numbers are hung over the doors of the lottery-offices. If Madame Descoings had paid her stake and held her ticket, she would have gone by half-past nine to learn her fate at a building close to the ministry of Finance, in the rue Neuve-des-Petits Champs. On drawing days, an observer might watch with curiosity the crowd of old women, cooks, and old men assembled about the door of this building; a sight as remarkable as the cue of people about the Treasury on dividend days.

“Well, here you are, rolling in wealth!” said old Desroches, coming into the room just as the Descoings swallowed her last drop of coffee.

“What do you mean?” cried poor Agathe.

“Her trey has turned up,” he said, producing the list of numbers written on a bit of paper, such as the officials of the lottery put by hundreds into little wooden bowls on their counters.

Joseph read the list. Agathe read the list. The Descoings read nothing; she was struck down as by a thunderbolt. At the change in her face, at the cry she gave, old Desroches and Joseph carried her to her bed. Agathe went for a doctor. The poor woman was seized with apoplexy and only recovered consciousness at four in the afternoon; old Haudry, her doctor, then said that, in spite of this improvement, she ought to settle her worldly affairs and think of her salvation. She herself only uttered two words:--

“Three millions!”

Old Desroches, informed by Joseph, with due reservations, of the state of things, related many instances where lottery-players had seen a fortune escape them on the very day when, by some fatality, they had forgotten to pay their stakes; but he thoroughly understood that such a blow might be fatal when it came after twenty years’ perseverance. About five o’clock, as a deep silence reigned in the little appartement and the sick woman, watched by Joseph and his mother, was expecting her grandson Bixiou, whom Desroches had gone to fetch, the sound of Philippe’s step and cane resounded on the staircase.

“There he is! there he is!” cried the Descoings, sitting up in bed and suddenly able to use her paralyzed tongue.

Agathe and Joseph were deeply impressed by this powerful effect of the horror which violently agitated the old woman. Their painful suspense was soon ended by the sight of Philippe’s convulsed and purple face, his staggering walk, and the horrible state of his eyes, which were deeply sunken, dull, and yet haggard; he had a strong chill, and his teeth chattered.

“Starvation in Prussia!” he cried, looking about him. “Nothing to eat or drink?--and my throat on fire! Well, what’s the matter? The devil is always meddling in our affairs. There’s my old Descoings in bed, looking at me with her eyes as big as saucers.”

“Be silent, monsieur!” said Agathe, rising. “At least, respect the sorrows you have caused.”

“_Monsieur_, indeed!” he cried, looking at his mother. “My dear little mother, that won’t do. Have you ceased to love your son?”

“Are you worthy of love? Have you forgotten what you did yesterday? Go and find yourself another home; you cannot live with us any longer,--that is, after to-morrow,” she added; “for in the state you are in now it is difficult--”

“To turn me out,--is that it?” he interrupted. “Ha! are you going to play the melodrama of ‘The Banished Son’? Well done! is that how you take things? You are all a pretty set! What harm have I done? I’ve cleaned out the old woman’s mattress. What the devil is the good of money kept in wool? Do you call that a crime? Didn’t she take twenty thousand francs from you? We are her creditors, and I’ve paid myself as much as I could get,--that’s all.”

“My God! my God!” cried the dying woman, clasping her hands and praying.

“Be silent!” exclaimed Joseph, springing at his brother and putting his hand before his mouth.

“To the right about, march! brat of a painter!” retorted Philippe, laying his strong hand on Joseph’s head and twirling him round, as he flung him on a sofa. “Don’t dare to touch the moustache of a commander of a squadron of the dragoons of the Guard!”

“She has paid me back all that she owed me,” cried Agathe, rising and turning an angry face to her son; “and besides, that is my affair. You have killed her. Go away, my son,” she added, with a gesture that took all her remaining strength, “and never let me see you again. You are a monster.”

“I kill her?”

“Her trey has turned up,” cried Joseph, “and you stole the money for her stake.”

“Well, if she is dying of a lost trey, it isn’t I who have killed her,” said the drunkard.

“Go, go!” said Agathe. “You fill me with horror; you have every vice. My God! is this my son?”

A hollow rattle sounded in Madame Descoings’s throat, increasing Agathe’s anger.

“I love you still, my mother,--you who are the cause of all my misfortunes,” said Philippe. “You turn me out of doors on Christmas-day. What did you do to grandpa Rouget, to your father, that he should drive you away and disinherit you? If you had not displeased him, we should all be rich now, and I should not be reduced to misery. What did you do to your father,--you who are a good woman? You see by yourself, I may be a good fellow and yet be turned out of house and home,--I, the glory of the family--”

“The disgrace of it!” cried the Descoings.

“You shall leave this room, or you shall kill me!” cried Joseph, springing on his brother with the fury of a lion.

“My God! my God!” cried Agathe, trying to separate the brothers.

At this moment Bixiou and Haudry the doctor entered. Joseph had just knocked his brother over and stretched him on the ground.

“He is a regular wild beast,” he cried. “Don’t speak another word, or I’ll--”

“I’ll pay you for this!” roared Philippe.

“A family explanation,” remarked Bixiou.

“Lift him up,” said the doctor, looking at him. “He is as ill as Madame Descoings; undress him and put him to bed; get off his boots.”

“That’s easy to say,” cried Bixiou, “but they must be cut off; his legs are swollen.”

Agathe took a pair of scissors. When she had cut down the boots, which in those days were worn outside the clinging trousers, ten pieces of gold rolled on the floor.

“There it is,--her money,” murmured Philippe. “Cursed fool that I was, I forgot it. I too have missed a fortune.”

He was seized with a horrible delirium of fever and began to rave. Joseph, assisted by old Desroches and Bixiou, carried him to his room. Doctor Haudry was obliged to write a line to the Hopital de la Charite and borrow a strait-waistcoat; for the delirium ran so high he feared Philippe might kill himself—he was raving. At nine o’clock calm was restored. The Abbe Loraux and Desroches endeavored to comfort Agathe, who never ceased to weep at her aunt’s bedside. She listened in silence and obstinately shook her head; Joseph and the Descoings alone knew the extent and depth of her inward wound.

“He will learn to do better, mother,” said Joseph, when Desroches and Bixiou had left.

“Oh!” cried the widow, “Philippe is right,--my father cursed me: I have no right to--Here, here is your money,” she said to Madame Descoings, adding Joseph’s three hundred francs to the two hundred found on Philippe. “Go and see if your brother does not need something,” she said to Joseph.

“Will you keep a promise made to a dying woman?” asked Madame Descoings, who felt her mind failing.

“Yes, aunt.”

“Then swear to me to give your property to young Desroches for a life annuity. My income ceases at my death; and from what you have just said, I know you will let that wretch wring the last farthing out of you.”

“I swear it, aunt.”

The old woman died on the 31st of December, five days after the terrible blow which old Desroches had so innocently given her. The five hundred francs—the only money in the household—were barely enough to pay for her funeral. She left a small amount of silver and some furniture, the value of which Madame Bixiou paid over to her grandson Bixiou. Reduced to eight hundred francs’ annuity paid to her by young Desroches, who had bought a business without clients and himself took the capital of twelve thousand francs, Agathe gave up her appartement on the third floor, and sold all her superfluous furniture. When, at the end of a month, Philippe seemed convalescent, his mother coldly explained that the costs of his illness had taken all her ready money, that she would be obliged to work for her living, and urged him, with the utmost kindness, to re-enter the army and support himself.

“You might have spared me that sermon,” said Philippe, looking at his mother with an eye cold from utter indifference. “I have seen all along that neither you nor my brother love me. I am alone in the world; I like it best!”

“Make yourself worthy of our affection,” answered the poor mother, struck to the heart, “and we will give it back to you--”

“Nonsense!” he cried, interrupting her.

He took his old hat, rubbed white at the edges, stuck it over one ear, and went downstairs, whistling.

“Philippe! where are you going without any money?” cried his mother, who could not repress her tears. “Here, take this--”

She held out to him a hundred francs in gold, wrapped in paper. Philippe came up the stairs he had just descended and took the money.

“Well; won’t you kiss me?” she said, bursting into tears.

He pressed his mother in his arms, but without the warmth of feeling which was all that could give value to the embrace.

“Where shall you go?” asked Agathe.

“To Florentine, Girodeau’s mistress. Ah! they are real friends!” he answered brutally.

He went away. Agathe turned back with trembling limbs, failing eyes, and aching heart. She fell upon her knees, prayed God to take her unnatural child into His own keeping, and abdicated her woeful motherhood.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER VI

By February, 1822, Madame Bridau had settled into the attic room over the kitchen of her former appartement. The painter’s studio and bedroom was opposite, on the other side of the staircase. When Joseph saw his mother thus reduced, he was determined to make her as comfortable as possible. After his brother’s departure he assisted in rearranging the garret, giving it an artist’s touch. He added a rug; the bed, simple but tasteful, had something monastic about it; the walls, hung with cheap glazed cotton chosen with taste and newly covered, harmonized with the furniture and gave the room an air of nicety. In the hallway he added a double door, with a portiere to the inner one. The window was shaded by a blind that softened the light. If the poor mother’s life was reduced to the plainest circumstances any woman in Paris could know, Agathe was at least better off than most in such case, thanks to her son.

To save his mother from the cruel cares of reduced housekeeping, Joseph took her every day to dine at a table-d’hote in the rue de Beaune, frequented by well-bred women, deputies, and titled people, where each person’s dinner cost ninety francs a month. Having nothing but the breakfast to provide, Agathe resumed old habits she had once kept with the father. But despite Joseph’s pious lies she discovered her dinner cost him nearly a hundred francs a month. Alarmed at such expense, and not imagining her son could earn money by painting naked women, she obtained through her confessor, the Abbe Loraux, a place worth seven hundred francs a year in a lottery-office belonging to the Comtesse de Bauvan, widow of a Chouan leader. Lottery-offices usually sufficed for the support of the manager’s family; after the Restoration some reduced women of title got two offices, worth six to ten thousand a year, employing a paid manager who often hired an assistant because the offices had to be kept open till midnight and the reports required much writing. The Comtesse promised, if her manager left, to give the place to Agathe; meantime she took Agathe as assistant with a salary of six hundred francs. Poor Agathe, obliged at the office by ten in the morning, had scarcely time for her dinner. She returned to work at seven in the evening, remaining till midnight. Joseph never, for two years, failed to fetch his mother at night and bring her back to the rue Mazarin; often he went to take her to dinner; friends frequently saw him leave the opera or some brilliant salon to be punctually at midnight at the rue Vivienne office.

Agathe soon acquired the monotonous regularity of life that supports those who have endured violent sorrows. In the morning, after doing up her room, in which there were no longer cats and little birds, she prepared breakfast at her own fire and carried it into the studio, where she ate with her son. She then arranged Joseph’s bedroom, put out the fire in her own chamber, and brought her sewing to the studio, sitting by the little iron stove and leaving if a comrade or model entered. Though she understood nothing of art, the silence suited her. She made no pretence of art appreciation; she was amazed at the importance they attached to color, composition, drawing. When the Cenacle friends or some brother-painter—Schinner, Pierre Grassou, Leon de Lora, the youthful “rapin” called Mistigris—discussed a picture, she would later examine it and find nothing to justify their fine words and disputes. She made her son’s shirts, mended his stockings, even cleaned his palette, supplied rags to wipe brushes, and kept order in the studio. Seeing how much thought his mother gave to such details, Joseph heaped attentions on her. If mother and son had no sympathy for art, they were bound by tenderness. One morning as she was petting Joseph while he sketched a large picture (finished later and never understood), she said aloud, as if casually,—

“My God! what is he doing?”

“Doing? who?”

“Philippe.”

“Oh, ah! he’s sowing his wild oats; that fellow will make something of himself by and by.”

“But he has gone through the lesson of poverty; perhaps poverty changed him. If he were prosperous he would be good—”

“You think, my dear mother, he suffered during that journey of his. You are mistaken; he kept carnival in New York just as he does here—”

“But if he is suffering at this moment, near to us, would it not be horrible?”

“Yes,” replied Joseph. “For my part, I will gladly give him some money; but I don’t want to see him; he killed our poor Descoings.”

“So,” resumed Agathe, “you would not be willing to paint his portrait?”

“For you, dear mother, I’d suffer martyrdom. I can make myself remember nothing except that he is my brother.”

“His portrait as a captain of dragoons on horseback?”

“Yes, I’ve a copy of a fine horse by Gros and I haven’t any use for it.”

“Well, then, go and see that friend of his and find out what has become of him.”

“I’ll go!”

Agathe rose; her scissors and work fell at her feet; she kissed Joseph’s head and dropped two tears on his hair.

“He is your passion, that fellow,” said the painter. “We all have our hopeless passions.”

That afternoon, about four o’clock, Joseph went to the rue du Sentier and found his brother, who had taken Giroudeau’s place. The old dragoon had been promoted to cashier of a weekly journal established by his nephew. Although Finot still owned the other newspaper, which he had divided into shares, the proprietor and editor de visu was Lousteau, the son of the sub-delegate of Issoudun on whom the Bridaus’ grandfather, Doctor Rouget, had vowed vengeance; consequently he was the nephew of Madame Hochon. To please his uncle, Finot gave Philippe the place Giroudeau was quitting, cutting off half the salary. Giroudeau audited accounts daily and carried away receipts; Coloquinte, the office boy, also watched the slippery Philippe who, however, was behaving properly. A salary of six hundred francs and five hundred from his cross sufficed him to live, living in a warm office all day and at the theatre on a free pass every evening, needing only food and a place to sleep in. Coloquinte was departing with stamped papers on his head, and Philippe was brushing his false sleeves of green linen when Joseph entered.

“Bless me, here’s the cub!” cried Philippe. “Well, we’ll go and dine together. You shall go to the opera; Florine and Florentine have got a box. I’m going with Giroudeau; you shall be of the party, and I’ll introduce you to Nathan.”

He took his leaded cane and moistened a cigar.

“I can’t accept your invitation; I am to take our mother to dine at a table d’hote.”

“Ah! how is she, the poor, dear woman?”

“She is pretty well,” answered the painter, “I have just repainted our father’s portrait, and aunt Descoings’s. I have also painted my own, and I should like to give our mother yours, in the uniform of the dragoons of the Imperial Guard.”

“Very good.”

“You will have to come and sit.”

“I’m obliged to be in this hen-coop from nine o’clock till five.”

“Two Sundays will be enough.”

“So be it, little man,” said Napoleon’s staff officer, lighting his cigar at the porter’s lamp.

When Joseph related Philippe’s position to his mother, on their way to dinner in the rue de Beaune, he felt her arm tremble in his, and joy lighted her worn face; the poor soul breathed like one relieved of a heavy weight. The next day, inspired by gratitude, she paid Joseph a number of little attentions; she decorated his studio with flowers, and bought two stands of plants. On the first Sunday when Philippe was to sit, Agathe arranged a charming breakfast in the studio. She laid it out on the table; not forgetting a flask of brandy, half full. She stayed behind a screen, making a little hole. The ex-dragoon sent his uniform the night before, and she had kissed it. When Philippe was placed, in full dress, on a straw horse, all saddled, which Joseph had hired, Agathe, fearing to betray her presence, mingled the soft sound of her tears with the brothers’ conversation. Philippe posed for two hours before and two hours after breakfast. At three o’clock, he put on ordinary clothes and, lighting a cigar, proposed to dine together in the Palais-Royal, jingling gold in his pocket as he spoke.

“No,” said Joseph, “it frightens me to see gold about you.”

“Ah! you’ll always have a bad opinion of me in this house,” cried the colonel in a thundering voice. “Can’t I save my money, too?”

“Yes, yes!” cried Agathe, coming out of her hiding-place, and kissing her son. “Let us go and dine with him, Joseph!”

Joseph dared not scold his mother. He went and dressed; Philippe took them to the Rocher de Cancale, where he gave a splendid dinner, the bill amounting to a hundred francs.

“The devil!” muttered Joseph uneasily; “with an income of eleven hundred francs you manage, like Ponchard in the ‘Dame Blance,’ to save enough to buy estates.”

“Bah, I’m on a run of luck,” answered the dragoon, who had drunk enormously.

Hearing this speech as they were on the cafe steps, and before getting into the carriage to go to the theatre—Philippe was to take his mother to the Cirque-Olympique (the only theatre her confessor allowed)—Joseph pinched his mother’s arm. She pretended to feel unwell and refused to go; Philippe took them back to the rue Mazarin, where, as soon as she was alone with Joseph, Agathe fell into gloomy silence.

The following Sunday Philippe came again. This time his mother was visibly present at the sitting. She served breakfast and questioned the dragoon, learning that the nephew of old Madame Hochon, her mother’s friend, played a considerable part in literature. Philippe and his friend Giroudeau lived among journalists, actresses, and booksellers, regarded as cashiers. Philippe, who had been drinking kirsch before posing, was loquacious and boasted he was about to become a great man. But when Joseph asked about his resources he was silent. There was no newspaper the next day, it being a fete, and to finish the portrait Philippe proposed to sit again the morrow. Joseph said the Salon was near and he lacked money for two frames; he must finish a copy of a Rubens ordered by Elie Magus, a dealer; the original belonged to a wealthy Swiss banker who had lent it for ten days, and the next day was the last; the sitting must be put off till the following Sunday.

“Is that it?” asked Philippe, pointing to a copy of Rubens on an easel.

“Yes,” replied Joseph; “it is worth twenty thousand francs. That’s what genius can do. It will take me all tomorrow to get the tones of the original and make the copy look so old it can’t be distinguished from it.”

“Adieu, mother,” said Philippe, kissing Agathe. “Next Sunday, then.”

The next day Elie Magus was to come for his copy. Joseph’s friend Pierre Grassou, working for the same dealer, wanted to see it when finished. To play a trick, Joseph, when he heard his knock, put the copy, varnished with a glaze of his own, in place of the original, and put the original on his easel. Pierre Grassou was completely taken in and then amazed and delighted at Joseph’s success.

“Do you think it will deceive old Magus?” he said.

“We shall see,” answered the latter.

The dealer did not come as promised. It was getting late; Agathe dined that day with Madame Desroches, who had recently lost her husband, and Joseph proposed to Pierre Grassou to dine at his table d’hote. As he went out he left the key of his studio with the concierge.

An hour later Philippe appeared and said to the concierge,—

“I am to sit this evening; Joseph will be in soon, and I will wait for him in the studio.”

The woman gave him the key; Philippe went upstairs, took the copy thinking it was the original, went down again, returned the key saying he had forgotten something, and hurried off to sell his Rubens for three thousand francs. He had sent a message to Elie Magus asking him not to call till the following day.

That evening when Joseph returned, bringing his mother from Madame Desroches’s, the concierge told him of Philippe’s trick—how he had called intending to wait and gone away immediately.

“I am ruined—unless he has had the delicacy to take the copy,” cried Joseph, instantly suspecting theft. He ran up three flights and rushed into his studio. “God be praised!” he ejaculated. “He is, what he always has been, a vile scoundrel.”

Agathe, who had followed Joseph, did not understand his words; but when he explained, she stood still with tears in her eyes.

“Have I but one son?” she said in a broken voice.

“We have never yet degraded him to the eyes of strangers,” said Joseph; “but we must warn the concierge. We shall keep the keys ourselves. I’ll finish his blackguard face from memory; there’s not much to do.”

“Leave it as it is; it will pain me too much ever to look at it,” answered the mother, heart-stricken at such wickedness.

Philippe had been told how the money for this copy was to be expended; he knew the abyss into which he would plunge his brother through the loss of the Rubens; yet nothing restrained him. After this crime Agathe never mentioned him; her face acquired cold, concentrated, bitter despair; one thought possessed her.

“Some day,” she said to herself, “we shall hear of a Bridau in the police courts.”

Two months later, as Agathe was about to start for her office, an old officer announcing himself as a friend of Philippe’s on urgent business called on Madame Bridau, who happened to be in Joseph’s studio.

When Giroudeau gave his name, mother and son trembled, and none the less because the ex-dragoon had the face of a tough old sailor of the worst type. His fishy gray eyes, piebald moustache, the remains of shaggy hair fringing a skull the color of fresh butter, all gave a debauched and libidinous expression. He wore an old iron-gray overcoat decorated with the red ribbon of a Legion of honor officer, which met with difficulty over a gastronomic stomach and a mouth that stretched from ear to ear, and a pair of powerful shoulders. The torso was supported by spindling legs, while rubicund tints on the cheek-bones testified to a rollicking life. Deep wrinkles overhung a velvet collar worse for wear. Among other adornments, the ex-dragoon wore enormous gold rings in his ears.

“What a ‘noceur’!” thought Joseph, using a popular expression meaning a loose fish.

“Madame,” said Finot’s uncle and cashier, “your son is in so unfortunate a position that his friends find it necessary to ask you to share the somewhat heavy expense he is to them. He can no longer work at the office; and Mademoiselle Florentine, of the Porte-Saint-Martin, has taken him to lodge with her, in a miserable attic in the rue de Vendome. Philippe is dying; and if you and his brother are not able to pay for the doctor and medicines, we shall have to have him taken to the hospital of the Capuchins. For three hundred francs we would keep him where he is. But he must have a nurse; at night, when Florentine is at the theatre, he persists in going out and takes things injurious to his treatment. As we are fond of him, this makes us unhappy. The poor fellow has pledged the pension of his cross for three years; he is temporarily displaced from his office, and has literally nothing. He will kill himself, madame, unless we put him into Doctor Dubois’s private asylum. It is a decent hospital; they will take him for ten francs a day. Florentine and I will pay half, if you will pay the rest; it won’t be more than two months.”

“Monsieur, it is difficult for a mother not to be eternally grateful for your kindness to her son,” replied Agathe; “but this son is banished from my heart, and as for money, I have none. Not to be a burden on my son who works day and night and deserves all a mother’s love, I am assistant in a lottery-office—at my age!”

“And you, young man,” said the old dragoon to Joseph; “can’t you do as much for your brother as a poor dancer and an old soldier?”

“Look here!” said Joseph, out of patience; “do you want me to tell you in artist language what I think of your visit? Well, you have come to swindle us on false pretences.”

“To-morrow your brother shall go to the hospital.”

“And he will do very well there,” answered Joseph. “If I were in like case, I should go there too.”

Giroudeau withdrew, much disappointed and mortified at being obliged to send to a hospital a man who had carried the Emperor’s orders at Montereau. Three months later, at the end of July, as Agathe one morning was crossing the Pont Neuf to avoid paying a sou at the Pont des Arts, she saw, along the Quai de l’Ecole, a man bearing all the signs of second-class poverty, who she thought resembled Philippe. In Paris there are three classes of poverty. First, the poverty of those who preserve appearances and have a future—young men, artists, momentarily unfortunate—whose distress is not visible except to a close observer; they continue to drive in cabriolets. Second, the poverty of old men indifferent to everything—the poverty of small incomes, old clerks wearing alpaca overcoats with the cross of the Legion. Third, poverty in rags, the people’s poverty, poetic and often depicted in art. The man Agathe thought her son rode astride the last two classes: ragged neck-cloth, scurfy hat, broken patched boots, threadbare coat whose buttons had shed their mould, torn pockets and dirty collar. Scraps of flue were in the creases; his hands were black as a mechanic’s. A knitted waistcoat, discolored, showed below the sleeves and above the trousers, likely instead of a shirt. Philippe wore a green silk shade with a wire edge over his eyes; his nearly bald head, his skin tints, and his sunken face too plainly revealed he had just left the terrible Hopital du Midi. His blue overcoat, whitened at the seams, was still decorated with the ribbon of his cross; passers-by looked at the hero—some victim of government—with curiosity and commiseration; the rosette attracted notice, and the fiercest ultras were jealous for the Order’s honor. In those days, however much the government tried to discredit the Order by bestowing crosses right and left, there were not fifty-three thousand persons decorated.

Agathe trembled through her being. If it were impossible to love this son any longer, she could still suffer for him. Quivering with motherhood, she wept as she saw the brilliant staff officer of the Emperor turn to enter a tobacconist’s and pause on the threshold; he had felt in his pocket and found nothing. Agathe left the bridge, crossed the quay rapidly, took out her purse, thrust it into Philippe’s hand, and fled as if she had committed a crime. After that she ate nothing for two days; before her was the horrible vision of her son dying of hunger in Paris.

“When he has spent all the money in my purse, who will give him any?” she thought. “Giroudeau did not deceive us; Philippe is just out of that hospital.”

She no longer saw the assassin of her aunt, the scourge of the family, the domestic thief, gambler, drunkard, low liver of a bad life; she saw only a man recovering from illness yet doomed to die of starvation, the smoker deprived of tobacco. At forty-seven she grew to look seventy. Her eyes were dimmed with tears and prayers. Yet it was not the last grief this son was to bring; her worst fears were destined to be realized. A conspiracy of officers was discovered in the army, and Moniteur articles detailing arrests were hawked about the streets.

In the depths of her cage in the rue Vivienne lottery-office, Agathe heard the name of Philippe Bridau. She fainted, and the manager, understanding her trouble and the necessity of action, gave her two weeks’ leave.

“Ah! my friend,” she said to Joseph as she went to bed, “it is our severity which drove him to it.”

“I’ll go and see Desroches,” answered Joseph.

While the artist confided his brother’s affairs to the younger Desroches—who by now had the reputation of a keen and astute lawyer and did sundry services for personages of distinction, among others for des Lupeaulx—Giroudeau called upon the widow. This time Agathe believed him.

“Madame,” he said, “if you can produce twelve thousand francs your son will be set at liberty for want of proof. It is necessary to buy the silence of two witnesses.”

“I will get the money,” said the poor mother, without knowing how.

Inspired by this danger, she wrote to her godmother, old Madame Hochon, begging her to ask Jean-Jacques Rouget to send the twelve thousand francs and save his nephew. If Rouget refused, she entreated Madame Hochon to lend them, promising to return them in two years. By return courier she received the following letter:—

My dear girl: Though your brother has an income of not less than forty thousand francs a year, without counting sums he has laid by for seventeen years, which Monsieur Hochon estimates at more than six hundred thousand francs, he will not give a penny to nephews he has never seen. As for me, you know I cannot dispose of a farthing while my husband lives. Hochon is the greatest miser in Issoudun. I do not know what he does with his money; he does not give twenty francs a year to his grandchildren. As for borrowing the money, I should have to get his signature, and he would refuse it. I have not even attempted to speak to your brother, who lives with a concubine, to whom he is a slave. It is pitiable to see how the poor man is treated at home, when he might have a sister and nephews to take care of him.

I have hinted that your presence at Issoudun might save your brother and rescue a fortune of forty, perhaps sixty, thousand francs a year from the claws of that slut; but you either do not answer me, or you seem never to understand my meaning. So today I write without epistolary circumlocution. I feel for your misfortune, but, my dearest, I can do no more than pity you. And this is why: Hochon, at eighty-five, takes four meals a day, eats a salad with hard-boiled eggs every night, and frisk about like a rabbit. I shall have spent my whole life—for he will live to write my epitaph—without ever having had twenty francs in my purse. If you will come to Issoudun and counteract the influence of that concubine over your brother, you must stay with me, for there are reasons why Rouget cannot receive you in his house; but even then, I shall have hard work to get my husband to let me have you here. However, you can safely come; I can make him mind me. I know a way to get what I want out of him; I have only to speak of making my will. It seems such a horrid thing that I do not often have recourse to it; but for you, dear Agathe, I will do the impossible.

I hope your Philippe will get out of his trouble; I beg you to employ a good lawyer. In any case, come to Issoudun as soon as you can. Remember that your imbecile of a brother at fifty-seven is an older and weaker man than Monsieur Hochon. So it is pressing. People are talking of a will that cuts off your inheritance; Monsieur Hochon says there is still time to get it revoked.

Adieu, my little Agathe; may God help you! Believe in the love of your godmother,

Maximilienne Hochon, nee Lousteau.

P.S. Has my nephew, Etienne, who writes in the newspapers and is intimate, they tell me, with your son Philippe, been to pay his respects to you? But come at once to Issoudun, and we will talk.

This letter greatly impressed Agathe, who showed it to Joseph after mentioning Giroudeau’s proposal. The artist, wary when it concerned his brother, pointed out she ought to tell everything to Desroches.

Conscious of that wisdom, Agathe went with her son the next morning, at six, to find Desroches in the rue de Bussy. The lawyer, cold and stern as his late father, with a sharp voice, rough skin, implacable eyes, and a fox-like visage, bounded like a tiger when he heard of Giroudeau’s visit and proposal.

“And pray, mere Bridau,” he cried in his cracked voice, “how long will you be duped by your cursed brigand of a son? Don’t give him a farthing. Make yourself easy, I’ll answer for Philippe. I should like to see him brought before the Court of Peers; it might save his future. You are afraid he will be condemned; but I say, may it please God his lawyer lets him be convicted. Go to Issoudun, secure the property for your children. If you don’t succeed, if your brother has made a will in favor of that—woman, and you can’t make him revoke it—get all the evidence you can of undue influence, and I’ll institute proceedings. But you are too honest a woman to know how to get at such facts. I’ll go myself to Issoudun in the holidays—if I can.”

That “go myself” made Joseph tremble. Desroches winked at him to let his mother go downstairs first, and then detained the young man for a moment.

“Your brother is a great scoundrel; he is the cause of the discovery of this conspiracy—intentionally or not, I can’t say, for the rascal is so sly nobody can know the exact truth. Fool or traitor—take your choice. He will be put under police surveillance, nothing more. You needn’t be uneasy; no one knows this secret but myself. Go to Issoudun with your mother. You have good sense; try to save the property.”

“Come, my poor mother, Desroches is right,” said Joseph, rejoining Agathe on the staircase. “I have sold my two pictures, let us start for Berry; you have two weeks’ leave of absence.”

After writing to her godmother announcing their arrival, Agathe and Joseph started the next evening for Issoudun, leaving Philippe to his fate. The diligence rolled through the rue d’Enfer toward the Orleans highroad. When Agathe saw the Luxembourg, to which Philippe had been transferred, she could not refrain from saying,—

“If it were not for the Allies he would never be there!”

Many sons would have smiled with pity; the artist, alone with his mother in the coupe, caught her in his arms and pressed her to his heart, exclaiming,—

“Oh, mother! you are a mother just as Raphael was a painter. And you will always be a fool of a mother!”

Madame Bridau’s mind, soon diverted from her griefs by the journey’s distractions, began to dwell on its purpose. She re-read Madame Hochon’s letter, struck by “concubine” and “slut” used by a septuagenarian as pious and respectable as she, and by “imbecile” applied to Rouget; she wondered how her presence at Issoudun would save the inheritance. Joseph, poor disinterested artist that he was, knew little about the Code, and his mother’s remark absorbed him.

“Before our friend Desroches sent us off to protect our rights, he ought to have explained the means of doing so,” he exclaimed.

“So far as my poor head, which whirls at the thought of Philippe in prison—without tobacco, perhaps, and about to appear before the Court of Peers—leaves me any distinct memory,” returned Agathe, “I think young Desroches said we were to get evidence of undue influence, in case my brother has made a will in favor of that—that—woman.”

“He is good at that, Desroches is,” cried the painter. “Bah! if we can make nothing of it I’ll get him to come himself.”

“Well, don’t let us trouble our heads uselessly,” said Agathe. “When we get to Issoudun my godmother will tell us what to do.”

This conversation, just after they changed coaches at Orleans and entered the Sologne, shows how ill fitted the painter and his mother were for the task Desroches had set them.

Returning to Issoudun after thirty years’ absence, Agathe was about to find changes in its manners that make it necessary to sketch a picture of the town. Without it the reader would scarcely understand Madame Hochon’s heroism in assisting her goddaughter, or the strange situation of Jean-Jacques Rouget. Though Doctor Rouget had taught his son to regard Agathe as a stranger, it was extraordinary that for thirty years a brother should have given no sign of life to a sister. Such silence was plainly caused by peculiar circumstances, and any other sister and nephew would long ago have inquired. There is, moreover, a certain connection between Issoudun’s condition and the Bridau family’s interests, which will appear as the story goes on.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER VII

Issoudun, without offence to Paris, is one of the oldest cities in France. Despite the tradition making Probus the Noah of the Gauls, Caesar praises the excellent wine of Champ-Fort (“de Campo Forti”), still among Issoudun’s best vintages. Rigord describes the city’s great population and commerce. Yet these testimonies underestimate its true antiquity. Excavations by the local archaeologist Monsieur Armand Peremet uncovered, beneath the celebrated tower of Issoudun, a fifth-century basilica, probably the only one in France. Its stones came from a Roman temple that stood on the same site, preserving in its materials the sign-manual of an earlier civilization.

According to Peremet, like other French towns whose names end in “-dun” (“dunum”), Issoudun bears evidence of an autochthonous origin. “Dun,” associated with Druidical worship, shows a Celtic religious and military settlement. Beneath the Gaulish dun likely lay a Roman temple to Isis, whence, says Chaumon, the name Issous-Dun—“Is” being an abbreviation of “Isis.” Richard Coeur-de-lion doubtless built the famous tower (where he coined money) above the fifth-century basilica; he used the church as a foundation and preserved it by wrapping it in feudal fortifications. Issoudun was then the seat of the short-lived power of the Routiers and Cottereaux, adventurers Henry II. sent against his son Richard during his rebellion as Count of Poitou.

The history of Aquitaine, unwritten by the Benedictines, will probably remain obscure, for there are no more Benedictines to illuminate those archaeological tenebrae. Another sign of Issoudun’s ancient importance is the conversion of the Tournemine into a canal, a little stream elevated above the level of the Theols that surrounds the town—undoubtedly Roman engineering. Moreover, a suburb extending north from the castle is traversed by a street long called the rue de Rome, and its inhabitants, with distinct racial features, call themselves Romans. Mostly vine-growers, they display a stubbornness of manners and customs from their origin—and perhaps from their victory over the Cottereaux and Routiers, whom they exterminated on the plain of Charost in the twelfth century.

After the 1830 insurrection, France was too agitated to note the uprising of Issoudun’s vine-growers; a terrible affair there has remained unpublished for good reasons. The bourgeois of Issoudun refused the military entry, following medieval practice of declaring themselves responsible for their city. The government yielded to this sturdy people backed by seven or eight thousand vine-growers, who had burned archives and the offices of indirect taxation and dragged a customs officer through the streets, shouting at every lantern, “Let us hang him here!” The national guard saved the man’s life by taking him to prison under the pretext of drawing up an indictment. The general entered town only after a compromise with the vine-growers; it took courage to show himself. When he appeared at the hotel-de-ville, a man from the faubourg de Rome swung a volant—a huge pruning-hook on a pole—round his neck, crying, “No more clerks, or there’s an end to compromise!” The man would have been killed, had not one leader of the revolt intervened, having been promised that the chambers should be asked to suppress the excisemen.

In the fourteenth century Issoudun still had sixteen or seventeen thousand inhabitants, remnants of a population double that number in Rigord’s time. Charles VII owned a mansion still known into the eighteenth century as the Maison du Roi. Once a center of the woollen trade, the town supplied much of Europe with wool, making blankets, hats, and Chevreautin gloves. Under Louis XIV., Issoudun, birthplace of Baron and Bourdaloue, was noted for elegance and correct speech. The curate Poupard remarks on Issoudun’s inhabitants’ subtlety and wit. Today both wit and splendor have faded. Issoudun, whose area shows its ancient importance, now has barely twelve thousand inhabitants, including vine-dressers of four large suburbs—Saint-Paterne, Vilatte, Rome, and Alouette—which are almost small towns. The bourgeoisie are spread through the streets. Issoudun still holds the market for Berry’s fleeces, a commerce threatened by improvements in stock breeding being introduced everywhere except in Berry.

Issoudun’s vineyards produce a wine drunk through two departments and, if made like Burgundy or Gascony, could be among France’s best. But adherence to “doing as our fathers did” prevails. Vine-growers leave the grape refuse in the juice during fermentation, which makes the wine detestable though it could be a source of wealth. They say the refuse’s bitterness lessens with age, so a vintage will keep a century—an excuse even Guillaume le Breton gives in his “Phillippide.”

Issoudun’s decline stems from this sluggishness sunk to torpor, exemplified by one fact. When a highroad between Paris and Toulouse was discussed, the natural line from Vierzon to Chateauroux would pass through Issoudun, shorter than the present route via Vatan. But the leading people and city council demanded it go by Vatan, arguing that a road through their town would raise provisions and force them to pay thirty sous for a chicken. The only parallel is in wild Sardinia: when Charles Albert planned a highway between Sassari and Cagliari, the direct line through lawless Bornova was opposed; the first engineer was killed, and the road made a circuit eight miles longer.

The continual lowering of wine prices, though it pleases Issoudun’s bourgeoisie seeking cheap provisions, threatens the vine-growers with ruin as costs and taxes weigh heavier—just as the woollen trade suffers from lack of improvement in sheep breeding. Country folk fear change, even that most beneficial. A Parisian may show a laborer that eating some meat would be cheaper and strengthen him, but the Berrichon, fearing gossip and being pointed at, refuses it. “Think of the gossip, monsieur,” they say, preferring to endure poverty rather than be talked about. Many bourgeois utter the phrase with inward pride.

While ignorance and custom are invincible in the country, the town itself has reached social stagnation. Meeting decaying fortunes by sordid economy, each family lives for itself. Society lacks the class distinctions that give manners character. There are no nobles—Cottereaux, Routiers, Jacquerie, religious wars, and the Revolution abolished them, a triumph Issoudun applauds. Issoudun repeatedly refused a garrison, claiming cheap provisions, thus losing intercourse with the age and profits from troops. Before 1756 it was a delightful garrison town. A judicial feud between a lieutenant-general and the Marquis de Chapt, whose son—a dragoon officer—was put to death, deprived the town of a garrison. The forty-fourth demi-brigade’s sojourn during the civil war did not reconcile inhabitants to soldiers.

Bourges, with a declining population, suffers the same malady. Vitality leaves these communities. The government is to blame: an administration should find and heal wounds on the body politic by sending energetic men with power to change things. Instead, it approves this fatal tranquillity. Who would accept being buried in such arrondissements, where useful work lacks glory? Any ambitious outsider soon falls into local inertia. Issoudun would have benumbed Napoleon.

In 1822 the arrondissement’s administrators all belonged to Berry. Administration became nullity or farce—except in rare important cases. The procureur du roi, Monsieur Mouilleron, was cousin to the whole community, his substitute from a town family. The court judge, before attaining his seat, became famous for a provincial saying that branded him forever: ending a summing-up, he told the accused, “My poor Pierre! the thing is as plain as day; your head will be cut off. Let this be a lesson to you.” The commissary of police, in office since the Restoration, had relations throughout the arrondissement. Religion’s influence was null; even the curate was held in little esteem.

This radical, ignorant bourgeoisie—loving to annoy others—spread tales, some comic, about Jean-Jacques Rouget and his servant-woman. Still, children went to Sunday-school, schools were kept up, mass said, taxes paid (the sole thing Paris extracts from the provinces), and the mayor passed resolutions. But these acts were routine, so the laxity of local government matched the moral and intellectual state of the governed. Subsequent events will show effects of this condition, common in many provinces, especially the South. The state to which bourgeois ascendency has reduced Issoudun may spread across France, even to Paris, if the bourgeois continue to rule domestic and foreign policy.

A word of topography. Issoudun stretches north-south along a hillside rounding toward the Chateauroux road. At the hill’s foot a canal, now called the “Riviere forcee,” fed from the Theols, was built when the town flourished for manufactories or to flood rampart moats. The “Riviere forcee” is an artificial arm of the Tournemine, joining other streams beyond the Rome suburb. These threads of water and the rivers irrigate wide meadows, enclosed by yellowish or white terraces dotted with black speckles—the vineyards’ aspect for seven months. Vine-growers cut plants annually to ugly stumps, unsupported, sheltered by barrels. A traveller from Vierzon, Vatan, or Chateauroux, weary of monotony, is pleasantly surprised by Issoudun’s meadows—an oasis supplying vegetables across thirty miles. Below the Rome suburb lies a vast tract of kitchen-gardens, upper and lower Baltan. A long poplar avenue leads from town across the meadows to the ancient convent of Frapesle, whose English gardens, ambitiously named Tivoli, are a Sunday rendezvous for lovers.

Traces of ancient grandeur reveal themselves; the most suggestive are the town’s divisions. The chateau, once almost a town with walls and moats, is a distinct quarter entered even now through ancient gateways by three bridges across two river arms, with the appearance of an old city. Ramparts show formidable foundations on which houses have sprung. Above the chateau is the famous tower, once the citadel. Conquering the city, which lay around these two fortified points, still left the tower and castle to be won.

The Saint-Paterne suburb, a palette-shaped extension beyond the tower encroaching on meadows, was probably part of the ancient city. In 1822 this opinion seemed certain because of the then-existence of the charming church of Saint-Paterne, recently pulled down by the heir of the buyer from the nation. This Romanesque church, one of France’s finest, perished without a single drawing of its portal, which was perfectly preserved. The lone voice raised to save it found no echo in town or department. Though the castle appears like an old town with narrow streets and mansions, the main city, repeatedly captured and burned—especially during the Fronde—has a modern air. Spacious streets and well-built houses contrast with the citadel’s aspect, earning Issoudun, in some geographies, the epithet “pretty.”

In such a town, lacking activity, taste for art, or learned occupations, and where everyone stayed within a narrow circle, many young men after the Restoration in 1816 had no career until marriage or inheritance. Bored at home and lacking distraction, they “shed their cuticle” by sowing wild oats at the town’s expense. Avoiding daytime escapades to prevent recognition and arraignment before police courts, they chose the night. Thus, amid traces of lost civilizations, a last flare of drollery burst into being.

These young men amused themselves as courts and soldiers once did, banding together for mutual help and tricks. They became an organized conspiracy—the “Knights of Idleness.” By day they played saints, sleeping late after nights of mischief. The Knights began with commonplace pranks—unhooking and changing signs, ringing bells, flinging casks into neighbors’ cellars, rousing inhabitants with crashes suggesting explosions. In Issoudun, cellars are entered by openings near the door, covered by a wooden scuttle with iron hinges and padlock.

In 1816 such provincial pranks persisted. But in 1817 the Order acquired a Grand Master and, until 1823, Maxence Gilet, called Max, led mischief that spread something like terror in Issoudun and kept artisans and bourgeois perpetually uneasy.

Maxence Gilet’s antecedents, youth, and vigor predestined him for the role. The town supposed him the natural son of the sub-delegate Lousteau—the brother of Madame Hochon whose gallantries were remembered—and some said he might be Doctor Rouget’s son; in truth his father was a dragoon officer garrisoned at Bourges. Because Rouget and Lousteau had been close friends, both claimed paternity, leaving the matter undecided. Max’s mother, wife of a poor sabot-maker in the Rome suburb, was marvellously beautiful—a Trasteverine beauty she transmitted to her son. Madame Gilet, pregnant with Max in 1788, enjoyed the town’s attribution of his paternity to the two friends, perhaps to set them against each other. Gilet, the old drunkard, colluded with his wife; she kept the reputed fathers ignorant to secure protectors for her son. In Paris she would have prospered; at Issoudun she lived sometimes comfortably, mostly wretchedly, and in the long run was despised. Madame Hochon paid sixty francs a year for the lad’s schooling—a liberality attributed to her brother living at Sancerre.

Doctor Rouget, unlucky in sons, seeing Max’s beauty, paid the youngster’s seminary board until 1805. Lousteau died in 1800, and the doctor continued payments, leaving paternity forever unresolved. Maxence, the butt of jests, was soon forgotten because in 1806, a year after Rouget’s death, he began a venturesome life. Gifted with strength and agility, he plotted with Monsieur Hochon’s grandsons to vex the grocers, gathered fruit before owners could pick it, scaled walls, excelled at physical exercises, and loved hunting. Time was spent firing at a mark rather than studying, and he spent the doctor’s money on powder and shot for a pistol old Gilet had given him. In autumn 1806, at seventeen, Max committed an involuntary homicide: startling a pregnant woman in dusk while stealing fruit, her death was blamed on him. Threatened with the guillotine by Gilet, Max fled to Bourges, enlisted with a regiment bound for Egypt, and nothing came of the woman’s death.

In three campaigns Max distinguished himself and rose to captain; his lack of formal education did not impede him. In Portugal, 1809, he was left for dead in an English battery entered but not held. Taken prisoner, he was sent to the Spanish hulks at Cabrera, the most horrible prison station. Friends petitioned for the Legion of Honor and major’s rank, but the Emperor, campaigning in Austria and displeased with Portuguese events, withheld favors from those taken prisoner. Max was at Cabrera from 1810 to 1814. There he was demoralized: the hulks were like galleys, full of crime and infamy. To maintain will and protect against corruption, he killed in duels seven bullies among his fellow-prisoners, ridding the island of tyrants. He then reigned in his hulk by skill with weapons, strength, and cleverness.

But he committed arbitrary acts; some currying favor became his minions. In that school of misery, bitter minds dreamed of vengeance and hatched sophistries tending to evil. Though depraved, Max returned innocent when peace came in April 1814. He found his parents dead in the almshouse and destitute. At Napoleon’s landing at Cannes he went to Paris to ask for rank and decoration. A marshal then minister of war, recalling Max’s conduct in Portugal, put him in the Guard as captain—giving him the grade of major in infantry—but could not secure the cross. “The Emperor says that you will know how to win it at the first chance,” said the marshal. Indeed, Napoleon put Max on the decoration list the evening after Fleurus, where he distinguished himself.

After Waterloo Max retreated to the Loire. At disbandment Marshal Feltre refused to recognize his grade or cross. Enraged, Max declared he would not serve without rank or cross. The war-office deemed his demands presumptuous; he resigned, losing half-pay. Issoudun was roused at seeing the brave young man left with only twenty napoleons; the mayor gave him a six-hundred-franc office, which Max held a few months before giving it up. Captain Carpentier, a faithful Napoleonic officer, replaced him.

By now Max was grand master of the Knights of Idleness and lived in ways that lost him the bourgeoisie’s goodwill, though none openly told him, for he was feared, even by officers who, like him, had refused to serve the Bourbons and returned to Berry. Issoudun, small and unimportant, contained more Bonapartists than any town in France; these men became, as is known, nearly all Liberals.

In Issoudun and vicinity a dozen officers shared Max’s position. They admired and followed him, except Captain Carpentier and Major Mignonnet. Carpentier, a cavalry officer risen from the ranks, had married into the town’s best family; Mignonnet, from the École Polytechnique, served in a corps that held itself superior. In the Imperial armies two soldierly shades existed: a majority who despised civilians, and others—particularly artillerymen—more republican and not adopting the military-civil dichotomy. Thus Major Potel and Captain Renard befriended Max, while Mignonnet and Carpentier sided with the bourgeoisie, judging his conduct dishonorable.

Major Mignonnet, lean and dignified, busied himself with steam-engine problems and lived modestly with Monsieur and Madame Carpentier. His gentle manners and scientific pursuits won town respect; he and Carpentier were often said to be “quite another thing” from Potel, Renard, Max, and the cafe Militaire habitués, who retained soldierly manners and the Empire’s defective morals.

When Madame Bridau returned to Issoudun, Max was excluded from society. He showed self-respect by not appearing at the club or complaining about the reprobation, though he was the town’s handsomest, best-dressed man, spent much money, and kept a horse—a rarity at Issoudun as Byron’s horse in Venice. We shall see how Max, poor and apparently without means, became the town’s dandy. His shameful conduct, earning bourgeois and religious contempt, connected with interests that brought Agathe and Joseph to Issoudun.

Judging by his audacious bearing and face, Max cared little for public opinion; he expected revenge and to lord it over those who condemned him. Although the bourgeoisie thought ill of him, the common people admired his courage, daring, and decision—his degradations were mostly unknown, even to the bourgeoisie. Max played a role like the blacksmith in the Fair Maid of Perth: champion of Bonapartism and Opposition, counted on in great occasions. One incident clarifies his heroism.

In 1819 a battalion commanded by royalist officers, fresh from the Maison Rouge, passed through Issoudun on its way to Bourges garrison. Uncertain what to do in so constitutional a place, they lingered at the cafe Militaire. Every provincial town has such a cafe; Issoudun’s, at the place d’Armes on the rampart corner, kept by a widow of an officer, was the rendezvous of Bonapartists—officers on half-pay and others idolizing the Emperor. Since 1816 a banquet commemorated Napoleon’s coronation. The three royalists first in asked for papers including the “Quotidienne” and “Drapeau Blanc.” Issoudun’s cafe politics did not allow such royalist journals; the establishment stocked the “Commerce”—a name the “Constitutionnel” adopted for a time after suppression, and locals called it the “Constitutionel,” understanding the play of words.

The fat landlady said she did not take those papers. “What papers do you take then?” asked a captain. The waiter brought the “Commerce.”

“Is that your paper? Have you no other?”

“No,” said the waiter.

The captain tore it up, flung the pieces on the floor, spat on them, and cried, “Bring dominos!”

Word of this insult to the Constitutional party spread through town. One phrase was on every lip—“Let us tell Max!” Max soon heard. The royalists still played dominoes when he entered the cafe with Major Potel and Captain Renard, followed by at least thirty young men curious for the outcome, most remaining outside. The room filled.

“Waiter, my newspaper,” said Max quietly.

A little comedy followed. The fat hostess, timid and conciliatory, said, “Captain, I have lent it!”

“Send for it,” cried one of Max’s friends.

“Can’t you do without it?” said the waiter; “we have not got it.”

The royalists laughed.

“They have torn it up!” cried a youth, looking at the royalist captain’s feet.

“Who dared destroy that paper?” demanded Max, rising, eyes flashing, arms crossed.

“And we spat upon it,” replied the three officers.

“You have insulted the whole town!” said Max, turning livid.

“Well, what of that?” asked the youngest officer.

With dexterity and audacity unexpected by the young men, Max slapped the nearest officer, saying, “Do you understand French?”

They fought in the allée de Frapesle, three against three; Potel and Renard would not let Max fight alone. Max killed his man. Major Potel wounded another so severely the young officer died in hospital the next day. The third escaped with a sword cut after wounding Captain Renard. The battalion left for Bourges that night. The affair spread through Berry and firmly established Max as a hero.

The Knights of Idleness, all young—the eldest not more than twenty-five—admired Max. Some envied his position. Under such a leader they accomplished great mischief. After May 1817, never a week passed without the town’s being thrown into uproar. Max imposed conditions; statutes were drawn. These youths trained like pupils of Amoros—bold, agile, clever and strong as criminals. They practised roof-climbing, scaling houses, noiseless walking, mixing mortar, walling up doors, and collected ropes, ladders, tools, and disguises. They perfected invention and execution of pranks, achieving a Panurge-like genius for evil that provoked laughter while covering victims with ridicule, silencing complaints. Being sons of good families, they had household information facilitating outrages.

Sometimes they lay in ambush along the Grand’rue or the Basse rue, towns’ arteries. Crouched in wall angles at the hour households slept, they called along the town in tones of terror: “What’s the matter?” “What is it?” repeated cries woke citizens who hurried out in shirts and caps with lights, asking questions and showing queer faces.

A poor old bookbinder who believed in hobgoblins worked in a small basement shop. The Knights, disguised as devils, invaded at night, put him in his cutting-press, and left him shrieking as if among hell's souls. He roused the neighbors with tales of Lucifer and was nearly driven insane.

In a severe winter the Knights took down the collector of taxes’ chimney and rebuilt it overnight so noiselessly that they left no trace, but arranged the flue to send all smoke into the house. The collector suffered two months before discovering the cause and had to rebuild a new chimney.

Another time they put three trusses of hay dusted with brimstone and oiled paper down the chimney of a pious old woman friend of Madame Hochon. In the morning, lighting her fire, she thought she had started a volcano. Fire-engines came, the population rushed to help; Knights among the firemen deluged her house, frightening her as much with water as they had with the “fire.” She grew ill with fear.

To keep someone on guard and in terror, they wrote anonymous letters warning of an impending robbery, then stole softly around his house or under his windows, whistling as if to call each other.

A famous performance was sending letters to all heirs of a miserly old woman likely to leave large property, announcing her death and requesting them to be present when the seals were affixed. Eighty persons arrived from neighboring towns in deep mourning—widows, sons, children, some in carrioles or carts. Imagine the scene between servants and arrivals and the notaries’ consultations; it created a sort of riot.

At last the sub-prefect waked to the intolerable state, made worse by the difficulty of discovering perpetrators. Suspicion fell on several youths; but the National Guard was a mere name, there was no garrison, and the lieutenant of police had only eight gendarmes—no patrols—so proof was impossible. The sub-prefect was put in the “order of the night” and became fair game. He breakfasted on two fresh eggs, kept chickens, boiled eggs himself with watch in hand, boasting his egg-boiling skill. For two years he had boiled eggs successfully, earning many witticisms. Then, for a month, each night his eggs were taken and replaced by hard-boiled ones, ruining his reputation as the “sous-prefet à l’oeuf.” He lost his egg-boiling laurels and never suspected the Knights, who had planned instead. Max greased the sub-prefect’s stoves nightly with fetid oil, making the house unbearable. His wife, going to mass one morning, found her shawl glued inside by a tenacious substance and had to go without it. The sub-prefect finally requested transfer. His cowardly submissiveness helped establish the Knights’ weird and comic authority.

Beyond the rue des Minimes and the place Misere lay a quarter enclosed between an arm of the “Riviere forcee” and the ramparts, from the place d’Armes to the pottery market. This square was filled with poor houses crowded together, divided by streets so narrow two abreast could not pass. This quarter, a sort of cour des Miracles, housed poor people and lowly trades—hovels and “blind houses.” It has been, from earliest ages, an accursed quarter, haunt of evil-doers; one thoroughfare is called “the street of the Executioner.” For five centuries it’s been customary for the executioner to have a red door. The executioner of Chateauroux’s assistant is said to live there, seen rarely; vine-dressers alone keep intercourse with him, for he inherits the craft of curing wounds and fractures. In Issoudun’s heyday women wandered this quarter. It was home to second-hand sellers, old-clothes dealers whose wares infected the air; in short, the rendezvous of that apocryphal population found in such city parts, where two or three Jews sometimes gain ascendancy.

At a corner in the livelier half of the quarter existed, from 1815 to 1823 and perhaps later, a public-house kept by a woman called Mère Cognette. The house was well built of white stone with ashlar and cement infill, one storey with an attic; over the door hung a huge pine branch like a Florentine bronze. A blue poster showed, above the words “Good Beer of Mars,” a soldier pouring foam in an arched jet toward a very décolletée woman—an image to make Delacroix swoon.

The ground floor was an immense hall serving as kitchen and dining-room, from whose beams provisions hung on huge nails. A winding staircase led to the upper storey; at the foot a door opened into a low, long room lit from a narrow, sunken provincial court like a chimney flue. Hidden by a shed and walls, this low room was where the Bad Boys held their plenary court. Ostensibly Pere Cognet boarded country folk on market-days; secretly he was landlord to the Knights. Pere Cognet, formerly a groom in a rich household, had married La Cognette, a cook in a good family. In the Rome suburb the town follows the Latin custom of placing a feminine termination on the husband’s name and giving it to the wife.

By uniting savings Pere Cognet and his spouse bought their house. La Cognette, forty, tall and plump, with a Roxelane nose, swarthy skin, jet-black hair, lively brown eyes and a mirthful intelligence, was chosen by Max as the Order’s Leonarde for her character and cookery. Pere Cognet, about fifty-six, thick-set and under his wife’s rule—“he only sees things with a good eye,” she joked, being blind of the other—kept absolute silence about nightly gatherings. From 1816 to 1823 neither revealed what went on. Their devotion was absolute, but self-interest secured their affection and silence. Whenever the Knights knocked a certain way Pere Cognet would get up, light the fire and candles, open the door, and fetch a particular wine laid in for the Order; La Cognette prepared an excellent supper, eaten before or after expeditions planned the previous evening or day.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER VIII

While Joseph and Madame Bridau were journeying from Orleans to Issoudun,
the Knights of Idleness perpetrated one of their best tricks. An old
Spaniard, a former prisoner of war, who after the peace had remained in
the neighborhood and did a small business in grain, came early one
morning to market, leaving his empty cart at the foot of the tower of
Issoudun. Maxence, who arrived at a rendezvous of the Knights, appointed
on that occasion at the foot of the tower, was soon assailed with the
whispered question, “What are we to do to-night?”

“Here’s Pere Fario’s cart,” he answered. “I nearly cracked my shins over
it. Let us get it up on the embankment of the tower in the first place,
and we’ll make up our minds afterwards.”

When Richard Coeur-de-Lion built the tower of Issoudun he raised it, as
we have said, on the ruins of the basilica, which itself stood above the
Roman temple and the Celtic Dun. These ruins, each representing several
centuries, form a mound full of the monuments of three distinct ages.
The tower is, therefore, the apex of a cone, from which the descent is
steep on all sides, and which is only approached by a series of steps.
To give an idea of the height of this tower, we may compare it to the
obelisk of Luxor on its pedestal. The pedestal of the tower of Issoudun,
which hid within its breast such archaeological treasures, was eighty
feet high on the side towards the town. In an hour the cart was taken
off its wheels and hoisted, piece by piece, to the top of the embankment
at the foot of the tower itself,--a work somewhat like that of soldiers
who carried artillery over the pass of the Grand Saint-Bernard. The
cart was then remounted on its wheels, and the Knights, by this time
hungry and thirsty, returned to Mere Cognette’s, where they were soon
seated round the table in the low room, laughing at the grimaces Fario
would make when he came after his barrow in the morning.

The Knights did not play such capers every night. The combined genius
of Sganarelle, Mascarille, and Scapin would not invent three hundred and
sixty-five pieces of mischief a year. Circumstances were not always
propitious: sometimes the moon shone clear, or the last prank had
irritated their betters; then one or another of their number refused to
share in some proposed outrage because a relation was involved. But if
the scamps were not at Mere Cognette’s every night, they always met
during the day, enjoying together hunting, the autumn vintages, and
winter skating. Among this assemblage of twenty youths, all of them at
war with the social somnolence of the place, some were more closely
allied to Max and made him their idol. A character like his often
fascinates other youths. The two grandsons of Madame Hochon--Francois
Hochon and Baruch Borniche--were his henchmen. These young fellows,
accepting the general opinion of the left-handed parentage of Lousteau,
looked upon Max as their cousin. Max, moreover, was liberal in lending
them money for their pleasures, which their grandfather Hochon refused;
he took them hunting, let them see life, and exercised more influence
over them than their own family. They were both orphans, and were kept,
although each had attained his majority, under the guardianship of
Monsieur Hochon, for reasons which will be explained when Monsieur
Hochon himself comes upon the scene.

At this particular moment Francois and Baruch (we will call them by
their Christian names for clearness) were sitting, one on each side of
Max, at the middle of a table lit by the fuliginous gleams of four
tallow candles. A dozen to fifteen bottles of various wines had just
been drunk, for only eleven of the Knights were present. Baruch--whose
name indicates that Calvinism still kept some hold on Issoudun--said
to Max, as the wine began to unloose tongues,--

“You are threatened in your stronghold.”

“What do you mean by that?” asked Max.

“Why, my grandmother has had a letter from Madame Bridau, who is her
goddaughter, saying that she and her son are coming here. My grandmother
has been getting two rooms ready for them.”

“What’s that to me?” said Max, taking up his glass and swallowing the
contents at a gulp with a comic gesture.

Max was then thirty-four years old. A candle near him threw a gleam
upon his soldierly face, lit up his brow, and brought out his clear
skin, ardent eyes, and black slightly curling hair that bristled from
the forehead in those five black tongues our ancestors called the “five
points.” Despite this sharp contrast of black and white, Max’s face was
very sweet, owing to an outline like Raphael’s Madonnas and a well-cut
mouth whose lips smiled graciously, giving a distinctive expression. The
rich coloring of a Berrichon cheek added to his kindly good-humor. When
he laughed heartily, he showed thirty-two teeth worthy of a pretty
woman’s mouth. About five feet six inches, the young man was well
proportioned—neither too stout nor too thin. His hands, carefully kept,
were white and rather handsome; but his feet recalled the suburb and the
foot-soldier of the Empire. Max would have made a good general of
division; he had shoulders worth a fortune to a marshal of France and a
breast broad enough to wear all the orders of Europe. Every movement
betrayed intelligence; born with grace and charm, like nearly all
children of love, the noble blood of his real father showed in him.

“Don’t you know, Max,” cried the son of a former surgeon-major named
Goddet--now the best doctor in the town--from the other end of the
table, “that Madame Hochon’s goddaughter is the sister of Rouget? If she
is coming here with her son, no doubt she means to make sure of getting
the property when he dies, and then--good-by to your harvest!”

Max frowned. Then, with a look that ran from one face to another round
the table, he watched the effect of this announcement, and again
replied,--

“What’s that to me?”

“But,” said Francois, “I should think that if old Rouget revoked his
will,--in case he has made one in favor of the Rabouilleuse--”

Here Max cut short his henchman’s speech. “I’ve stopped the mouths of
people who have dared to meddle with you, my dear Francois,” he said;
“and this is the way you pay your debts? You use a contemptuous nickname
in speaking of a woman to whom I am known to be attached.”

Max had never before said as much about his relations with the person
to whom Francois had just applied a name under which she was known at
Issoudun. The late prisoner at Cabrera—the major of the grenadiers of
the Guard—knew enough of honor to judge rightly as to the causes of
society’s disesteem for him. He had therefore never allowed any one to
speak to him on the subject of Mademoiselle Flore Brazier, the
servant-mistress of Jean-Jacques Rouget, so energetically termed a
“slut” by the respectable Madame Hochon. Everybody knew it was too
ticklish a subject with Max to be broached unless he began it; and
hitherto he had never begun. To risk his anger was altogether too
dangerous; so even his best friends had never joked him about the
Rabouilleuse. When they talked of his liaison with the girl before
Major Potel and Captain Renard, with whom he lived on intimate terms,
Potel would reply,--

“If he is the natural brother of Jean-Jacques Rouget where else would
you have him live?”

“Besides, after all,” added Captain Renard, “the girl is a worthless
piece, and if Max does live with her where’s the harm?”

After this snub, Francois could not at once catch up his thread; but he
was less able to do so when Max said to him, gently,--

“Go on.”

“Faith, no!” cried Francois.

“You needn’t get angry, Max,” said young Goddet; “didn’t we agree to
talk freely to each other at Mere Cognette’s? Shouldn’t we all be mortal
enemies if we remembered outside what is said, or thought, or done
here? All the town calls Flore Brazier the Rabouilleuse; and if Francois
did happen to let the nickname slip out, is that a crime against the
Order of Idleness?”

“No,” said Max, “but against our personal friendship. However, I
thought better of it; I recollected we were in session, and that was
why I said, ‘Go on.’”

A deep silence followed. The pause became so embarrassing that Max
broke it by exclaiming:--

“I’ll go on for him,” (sensation) “--for all of you,” (amazement) “--
and tell you what you are thinking” (profound sensation). “You think
that Flore, the Rabouilleuse, La Brazier, the housekeeper of Pere
Rouget,--for they call him so, that old bachelor, who can never have any
children!--you think, I say, that that woman supplies all my wants ever
since I came back to Issoudun. If I am able to throw three hundred
francs a month to the dogs, and treat you to suppers,--as I do to-night,
--and lend money to all of you, you think I get the gold out of
Mademoiselle Flore Brazier’s purse? Well, yes” (profound sensation).
“Yes, ten thousand times yes! Yes, Mademoiselle Brazier is aiming
straight for the old man’s property.”

“She gets it from father to son,” observed Goddet, in his corner.

“You think,” continued Max, smiling at Goddet’s speech, “that I intend
to marry Flore when Pere Rouget dies, and so this sister and her son,
of whom I hear to-night for the first time, will endanger my future?”

“That’s just it,” cried Francois.

“That is what every one thinks who is sitting round this table,” said
Baruch.

“Well, don’t be uneasy, friends,” answered Max. “Forewarned is
forearmed! Now then, I address the Knights of Idleness. If, to get rid
of these Parisians I need the help of the Order, will you lend me a
hand? Oh! within the limits we have marked out for our fooleries,” he
added hastily, perceiving a general hesitation. “Do you suppose I want
to kill them,--poison them? Thank God I’m not an idiot. Besides, if the
Bridaus succeed, and Flore has nothing but what she stands in, I should
be satisfied; do you understand that? I love her enough to prefer her to
Mademoiselle Fichet,--if Mademoiselle Fichet would have me.”

Mademoiselle Fichet was the richest heiress in Issoudun, and the hand
of the daughter counted for much in the reported passion of the younger
Goddet for the mother. Frankness of speech is a pearl of such price
that all the Knights rose to their feet as one man.

“You are a fine fellow, Max!”

“Well said, Max; we’ll stand by you!”

“A fig for the Bridaus!”

“We’ll bridle them!”

“After all, it is only three swains to a shepherdess.”

“The deuce! Pere Lousteau loved Madame Rouget; isn’t it better to love a
housekeeper who is not yoked?”

“If the defunct Rouget was Max’s father, the affair is in the family.”

“Liberty of opinion now-a-days!”

“Hurrah for Max!”

“Down with all hypocrites!”

“Here’s a health to the beautiful Flore!”

Such were the eleven responses, acclamations, and toasts shouted forth
by the Knights of Idleness, characteristic of their relaxed morality.
It is now easy to see what interest Max had in becoming their grand
master. By leading the young men of the best families in their follies
and amusements, and by doing them services, he meant to create a
support for himself when the day for recovering his position came. He
rose gracefully and waved his glass of claret, while all the others
waited eagerly for the coming allocution.

“As a mark of the ill-will I bear you, I wish you all a mistress who is
equal to the beautiful Flore! As to this irruption of relations, I
don’t feel any present uneasiness; and as to the future, we’ll see what
comes--”

“Don’t let us forget Fario’s cart!”

“Hang it! that’s safe enough!” said Goddet.

“Oh! I’ll engage to settle that business,” cried Max. “Be in the
market-place early, all of you, and let me know when the old fellow goes
for his cart.”

It was striking half-past three in the morning as the Knights slipped
out in silence to go to their homes; gliding close to the walls of the
houses without making the least noise, shod as they were in list shoes.
Max slowly returned to the place Saint-Jean, situated in the upper part
of the town, between the port Saint-Jean and the port Vilatte, the
quarter of the rich bourgeoisie. Maxence Gilet had concealed his fears,
but the news had struck home. His experience on the hulks at Cabrera
had taught him a dissimulation as deep and thorough as his corruption.
First, and above all, the forty thousand francs a year from landed
property which old Rouget owned was, let it be clearly understood, the
constituent element of Max’s passion for Flore Brazier. By his present
bearing it is easy to see how much confidence the woman had given him
in the financial future she expected to obtain through the infatuation
of the old bachelor. Nevertheless, the news of the arrival of the
legitimate heirs was of a nature to shake Max’s faith in Flore’s
influence. Rouget’s savings, accumulating during the last seventeen
years, still stood in his own name; and even if the will, which Flore
declared had long been made in her favor, were revoked, these savings
at least might be secured by putting them in the name of Mademoiselle
Brazier.

“That fool of a girl never told me, in all these seven years, a word
about the sister and nephews!” cried Max, turning from the rue de la
Marmouse into the rue l’Avenier. “Seven hundred and fifty thousand
francs placed with different notaries at Bourges, and Vierzon, and
Chateauroux, can’t be turned into money and put into the Funds in a
week, without everybody knowing it in this gossiping place! The most
important thing is to get rid of these relations; as soon as they are
driven away we ought to make haste to secure the property. I must think
it over.”

Max was tired. By the help of a pass-key, he let himself into Pere
Rouget’s house, and went to bed without making any noise, saying to
himself,--

“To-morrow, my thoughts will be clear.”

It is now necessary to relate where the sultana of the place Saint-Jean
picked up the nickname of “Rabouilleuse,” and how she came to be the
quasi-mistress of Jean-Jacques Rouget’s home.

As old Doctor Rouget, the father of Jean-Jacques and Madame Bridau,
advanced in years, he began to perceive the nonentity of his son; he
then treated him harshly, trying to break him into a routine that might
serve in place of intelligence. He thus, though unconsciously,
prepared him to submit to the yoke of the first tyranny that threw its
halter over his head.

Coming home one day from his professional round, the malignant and
vicious old man came across a bewitching little girl at the edge of some
fields that lay along the avenue de Tivoli. Hearing the horse, the child
sprang up from the bottom of one of the many brooks visible from the
heights of Issoudun, threading the meadows like ribbons of silver on a
green robe. Naiad-like, she rose suddenly on the doctor’s vision,
showing the loveliest virgin head that painters ever dreamed of. Old
Rouget, who knew the whole country-side, did not know this miracle of
beauty. The child, half naked, wore a forlorn petticoat of coarse
woollen stuff, woven in alternate strips of brown and white, full of
holes and very ragged. A sheet of rough writing paper, tied on by a
shred of osier, served her for a hat. Beneath this paper--covered with
pot-hooks and round O’s, from which it derived the name of “schoolpaper”
--the loveliest mass of blonde hair was twisted up and held by a comb
made to comb out the tails of horses. Her pretty tanned bosom and neck,
scarcely covered by a ragged fichu that was once a Madres handkerchief,
showed edges of white skin below the exposed sun-burned parts. One end
of her petticoat was drawn between the legs and fastened with a huge pin
in front, giving that garment the look of bathing drawers. The feet and
legs, visible through the clear water, attracted the eye by a delicacy
worthy of a medieval sculptor. The charming limbs exposed to the sun had
a ruddy tone not without beauty. The neck and bosom were worthy of
silks and cashmeres; and the nymph had blue eyes fringed with long
lashes, whose glance might have made a painter or a poet fall upon his
knees. The doctor, enough of an anatomist to trace the exquisite figure,
recognized the loss it would be to art if such lines were destroyed by
field labor.

“Where do you come from, little girl? I have never seen you before,”
said the old doctor, then sixty-two years of age. This scene took place
in the month of September, 1799.

“I belong in Vatan,” she answered.

Hearing Rouget’s voice, an ill-looking man, standing at some distance in
the deeper waters of the brook, raised his head. “What are you about,
Flore?” he said, “While you are talking instead of catching, the
creatures will get away.”

“Why have you come here from Vatan?” continued the doctor, paying no
heed to the interruption.

“I am catching crabs for my uncle Brazier here.”

“Rabouiller” is a Berrichon word which admirably describes the action
it expresses; namely, troubling the water of a brook, making it boil
and bubble with a branch whose end-shoots spread out like a racket. The
crabs, frightened by this operation, come hastily to the surface, and
in their flurry rush into the net the fisher has laid at a little
distance. Flore Brazier held her “rabouilloir” in her hand with the
natural grace of childlike innocence.

“Has your uncle got permission to hunt crabs?”

“Hey! are not we all under a Republic that is one and indivisible?”
cried the uncle from his station.

“We are under a Directory,” said the doctor, “and I know of no law which
allows a man to come from Vatan and fish in the territory of Issoudun”;
then he said to Flore, “Have you got a mother, little one!”

“No, monsieur; and my father is in the asylum at Bourges. He went mad
from a sun-stroke he got in the fields.”

“How much do you earn?”

“Five sous a day while the season lasts; I catch ‘em as far as the
Braisne. In harvest time, I glean; in winter, I spin.”

“You are about twelve years old?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Do you want to come with me? You shall be well fed and well dressed,
and have some pretty shoes.”

“No, my niece will stay with me; I am responsible to God and man for
her,” said Uncle Brazier who had come up to them. “I am her guardian,
d’ye see?”

The doctor kept his countenance and checked a smile which might have
escaped most people at the aspect of the man. The guardian wore a
peasant’s hat, rotted by sun and rain, eaten like cabbage leaves that
harbored caterpillars, and mended here and there with white thread.
Beneath the hat was a dark and sunken face, in which mouth, nose, and
eyes seemed four black spots. His forlorn jacket was patchwork, and his
trousers were of crash towelling.

“I am Doctor Rouget,” said that individual; “and as you are the guardian
of the child, bring her to my house, in the place Saint-Jean. It will
not be a bad day’s work for you; nor for her, either.”

Without waiting for an answer, and sure Uncle Brazier would soon bring
his pretty “rabouilleuse,” Doctor Rouget set spurs to his horse and
returned to Issoudun. He had hardly sat down to dinner before his cook
announced the arrival of the citoyen and citoyenne Brazier.

“Sit down,” said the doctor to the uncle and niece.

Flore and her guardian, still barefooted, looked round the doctor’s
dining-room with wondering eyes; never having seen its like before.

The house, which Rouget inherited from the Descoings estate, stands in
the middle of the place Saint-Jean, a long narrow square planted with a
few sickly lindens. The houses in this part of town are better built
than elsewhere, and that of the Descoings was one of the finest. It
stands opposite Monsieur Hochon’s house, and has three windows in front
on the first storey, and a porte-cochere on the ground-floor leading to
a courtyard and garden. Under the archway of the porte-cochere is the
door of a large hall lighted by two windows on the street. The kitchen
is behind this hall, part of the space used for a staircase to the
upper floor and attic. Beyond the kitchen is a wood-shed and wash-house,
a stable for two horses and a coach-house, over which are little lofts
for oats, hay, and straw, where the doctor’s servant slept.

The hall which the little peasant and her uncle admired is decorated
with wooden carvings of the time of Louis XV., painted gray, and a
handsome marble chimney-piece, over which Flore beheld herself in a
large mirror with a carved and gilded frame. On the panelled walls
hung several pictures, spoil of various religious houses, such as the
abbeys of Deols, Issoudun, Saint-Gildas, La Pree, Chezal-Beniot,
Saint-Sulpice, and the convents of Bourges and Issoudun, which kings
had enriched with Renaissance works. Among the pictures obtained by the
Descoings and inherited by Rouget were an Albano Holy Family, a Saint
Jerome of Domenichino, a Head of Christ by Gian Bellini, a Virgin of
Leonardo, a Bearing of the Cross by Titian, a Lazarus of Paul Veronese,
a Marriage of the Virgin by the priest Genois, two church paintings by
Rubens, and a replica of a picture by Perugino, perhaps by Perugino or
Raphael; and finally, two Correggios and one Andrea del Sarto.

The Descoings had culled these treasures from three hundred church
pictures, without knowing their value, selecting them for preservation.
Many were in magnificent frames, some still under glass. Perhaps it
was the beauty of the frames and the glass that led the Descoings to
retain the pictures. The furniture of the room was not wanting in the
sort of luxury prized in these days; at that time it had no value in
Issoudun. The clock on the mantle-shelf between two superb silver
candlesticks with six branches revealed the hand of Boulle. The armchairs
of carved oak, covered with tapestry due to the industry of high-born
women, would be treasured later; each was surmounted with a crown and
coat-of-arms. Between the windows stood a rich console, on whose marble
slab stood an immense China jar in which the doctor kept his tobacco.
But neither Rouget, nor his son, nor the cook took the slightest care of
these treasures. They spat upon a hearth of exquisite delicacy, whose
gilded mouldings were now green with verdigris. A handsome chandelier,
partly semi-transparent porcelain, and the ceiling were peppered with
black speckles, bearing witness to flies. The Descoings had draped the
windows with brocatelle curtains torn from some prior’s bed. To the left
of the entrance-door stood a chest or coffer worth many thousand francs,
which the doctor now used for a sideboard.

“Here, Fanchette,” cried Rouget to his cook, “bring two glasses; and
give us some of the old wine.”

Fanchette, a big Berrichon countrywoman, considered a better cook than
even La Cognette, ran in to receive the order with celerity that said
much for the doctor’s despotism and for her own curiosity.

“What is an acre of vineyard worth in your parts?” asked the doctor,
pouring out a glass of wine for Brazier.

“Three hundred francs in silver.”

“Well, then! leave your niece here as my servant; she shall have three
hundred francs in wages, and, as you are her guardian, you can take
them.”

“Every year?” exclaimed Brazier, with his eyes as wide as saucers.

“I leave that to your conscience,” said the doctor. “She is an orphan;
up to eighteen, she has no right to what she earns.”

“Twelve to eighteen--that’s six acres of vineyard!” said the uncle.
“Ay, she’s a pretty one, gentle as a lamb, well made and active, and
obedient as a kitten. She were the light o’ my poor brother’s eyes--”

“I will pay a year in advance,” observed the doctor.

“Bless me! say two years, and I’ll leave her with you, for she’ll be
better off with you than with us; my wife beats her, she can’t abide
her. There’s none but I to stand up for her, and the little saint of a
creature is as innocent as a new-born babe.”

When he heard the last part, the doctor, struck by the word “innocent,”
made a sign to the uncle and took him out into the courtyard and thence
to the garden; leaving the Rabouilleuse at the table with Fanchette and
Jean-Jacques, who immediately questioned her, and to whom she naively
related her meeting with the doctor.

“There now, my little darling, good-by,” said Uncle Brazier, coming back
and kissing Flore on the forehead; “you can well say I’ve made your
happiness by leaving you with this kind and worthy father of the poor;
you must obey him as you would me. Be a good girl, and behave nicely,
and do everything he tells you.”

“Get the room over mine ready,” said the doctor to Fanchette. “Little
Flore--I am sure she is worthy of the name--will sleep there in future.
To-morrow, we’ll send for a shoemaker and a dressmaker. Put another
plate on the table; she shall keep us company.”

That evening, all Issoudun could talk of nothing else than the sudden
appearance of the little “rabouilleuse” in Doctor Rouget’s house. In
that region of satire the nickname stuck to Mademoiselle Brazier before,
during, and after the period of her good fortune.

The doctor no doubt intended to do with Flore Brazier, in a small way,
what Louis XV. did in a large one with Mademoiselle de Romans; but he
was too late about it; Louis XV. was still young, whereas the doctor
was in the flower of old age. From twelve to fourteen, the charming
little Rabouilleuse lived a life of unmixed happiness. Always well
dressed, and often better tricked out than the richest girls in
Issoudun, she sported a gold watch and jewels, given by the doctor to
encourage her studies, and she had a master who taught her to read,
write, and cipher. But the almost animal life of the true peasant had
instilled into Flore such deep repugnance to the bitter cup of
knowledge, that the doctor stopped her education at that point. His
intentions with regard to the child, whom he cleansed and clothed and
taught, were interpreted in a variety of ways by the cackling society of
the town, whose gossip often produced fatal blunders, like those
relating to the birth of Agathe and that of Max. It is not easy for a
country community to disentangle truth from conjecture and contradictory
reports to which a single fact gives rise. The provinces insist on full
explanations, and usually end by knowing everything. But each person
clings to the version he or she likes best; proclaims it, argues it,
and considers it the only true one. In spite of the strong light cast
on people’s lives by the constant spying of a little town, truth is
thus often obscured; to be recognized it needs the impartiality which
historians or superior minds acquire by a higher point of view.

“What do you suppose that old gorilla wants at his age with a little
girl only fifteen years old?” society was still saying two years after
the arrival of the Rabouilleuse.

“Ah! that’s true,” they answered, “his days of merry-making are long
past.”

“My dear fellow, the doctor is disgusted at the stupidity of his son,
and he persists in hating his daughter Agathe; it may be that he has
been living a decent life for the last two years, intending to marry
little Flore; suppose she were to give him a fine, active, strapping
boy, full of life like Max?” said one of the wise heads of the town.

“Bah! don’t talk nonsense! After such a life as Rouget and Lousteau led
from 1770 to 1787, is it likely that either of them would have children
at sixty-five years of age? The old villain has read the Scriptures, if
only as a doctor, and he is doing as David did in his old age; that’s
all.”

“They say that Brazier, when he is drunk, boasts in Vatan that he
cheated him,” cried one who always believed the worst of people.

“Good heavens! neighbor; what won’t they say at Issoudun?”

From 1800 to 1805, that is, for five years, the doctor enjoyed all the
pleasures of educating Flore without the annoyances the ambitions and
pretensions of Mademoiselle de Romans inflicted, it is said, on Louis
le Bien-Aime. The little Rabouilleuse was so satisfied when she compared
the life she led at the doctor’s with that she would have led at her
uncle Brazier’s, that she yielded no doubt to the exactions of her
master as if she had been an Eastern slave. With due deference to
makers of idylls and to philanthropists, the inhabitants of the
provinces have very little idea of certain virtues; their scruples are
roused by self-interest, not by any sentiment of the right or the
becoming. Raised from infancy with no prospect but poverty and ceaseless
labor, they consider anything that saves them from the hell of hunger
and toil as permissible, particularly if it is not contrary to law.
Exceptions are rare. Virtue, socially speaking, is the companion of a
comfortable life, and comes only with education.

Thus the Rabouilleuse was an object of envy to all the young
peasant-girls within ten miles, although her conduct, from a religious
point of view, was supremely reprehensible. Flore, born in 1787, grew up
in the midst of the saturnalias of 1793 and 1798, whose lurid gleams
penetrated these country regions, then deprived of priests and faith and
altars and religious ceremonies; where marriage was nothing more than
legal coupling, and revolutionary maxims left a deep impression. This
was markedly the case at Issoudun, a land where, as we have seen, revolt
of all kinds is traditional. In 1802, Catholic worship was scarcely
re-established. The Emperor found it difficult to obtain priests. In
1806, many parishes all over France were still widowed; so slowly were
the clergy, decimated by the scaffold, gathered together again after
their violent dispersion.

In 1802, therefore, nothing was likely to reproach Flore Brazier,
unless it might be her conscience; and conscience was sure to be
weaker than self-interest in the ward of Uncle Brazier. If, as
everybody chose to suppose, the cynical doctor was compelled by his age
to respect a child of fifteen, the Rabouilleuse was none the less
considered very “wide awake,” a term much used in that region. Still,
some persons thought she could claim a certificate of innocence from
the cessation of the doctor’s cares and attentions in the last two
years of his life, during which time he showed her something more than
coldness.

Old Rouget had killed too many people not to know when his own end was
nigh; and his notary, finding him on his death-bed, draped as it were in
the mantle of encyclopaedic philosophy, pressed him to make a provision
in favor of the young girl, then seventeen years old.

“So I do,” he said, cynically; “my death sets her at liberty.”

This speech paints the nature of the old man. Covering his evil doings
with witty sayings, he obtained indulgence for them, in a land where wit
is always applauded,--especially when addressed to obvious self-interest.
In those words the notary read the concentrated hatred of a man whose
calculations had been balked by Nature herself, and who revenged himself
upon the innocent object of an impotent love. This opinion was
confirmed to some extent by the obstinate resolution of the doctor to
leave nothing to the Rabouilleuse, saying with a bitter smile, when the
notary again urged the subject upon him,--

“Her beauty will make her rich enough!”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER IX

Jean-Jacques Rouget did not mourn his father, though Flore Brazier did. The old doctor had made his son extremely unhappy, especially since he came of age in 1791; but he had given the little peasant-girl the material pleasures ideal to country-folk. When Fanchette asked Flore, after the funeral, “Well, what is to become of you, now that monsieur is dead?” Jean-Jacques’s eyes lighted up, and for the first time his dull face grew animated, showing feeling and seeming to brighten under the rays of a thought.

“Leave the room,” he said to Fanchette, who was clearing the table.

At seventeen, Flore retained that delicacy of feature and form, that distinction of beauty which attracted the doctor, and which women of the world know how to preserve, though it fades among peasant-girls like the flowers of the field. Nevertheless, the embonpoint that handsome countrywomen develop when they no longer live a life of toil and sunshine was already noticeable. Her bust had developed; the plump white shoulders were modelled on rich lines harmonizing with those of the throat, showing a few folds of flesh. But the face’s outline was still faultless, and the chin delicate.

“Flore,” said Jean-Jacques, in a trembling voice, “you feel at home in this house?”

“Yes, Monsieur Jean.”

As the heir was about to make his declaration, his tongue stiffened at recollection of the dead man just put in his grave, and a doubt seized him as to what lengths his father’s benevolence might have gone. Flore, quite unable to suspect his simplicity of mind, looked at her future master and waited, expecting him to go on; but he finally left her without knowing what to think of such obstinate silence. Whatever teaching the Rabouilleuse may have received from the doctor, it was long before she understood Jean-Jacques’s character, whose history we now present briefly.

At his father’s death, Jacques, then thirty-seven, was as timid and submissive to paternal discipline as a child of twelve. That timidity ought to explain his childhood, youth, and after-life to those reluctant to admit such characters; proofs are common everywhere. There are two species of timidity — of the mind and of the nerves; physical and moral. The one is independent of the other. The body may fear while the mind is calm, or vice versa. When both are united, that man will be a cipher all his life; such double-sided timidity makes what we call “an imbecile.” Often fine suppressed qualities hide within that imbecile. This double infirmity is produced quite as much by perfection of soul and organs as by defects still unstudied.

Jean-Jacques’s timidity came from a torpor of his faculties, which a great teacher or surgeon would have roused. In him, as in cretins, the sense of love had inherited a strength lacking to his mental qualities, though he had enough mind for ordinary affairs. The violence of passion, stripped of the ideal in which most young men expend it, only increased his timidity. He had never courted any woman in Issoudun. No young girl or matron would make advances to a young man of mean stature, awkward and shame-faced; his vulgar face, flattened features and pallid skin, made him look old before his time and was rendered still more hideous by large, prominent light-green eyes. A woman’s presence stultified him; passion drove him one way, lack of ideas held him back the other. Paralyzed between opposing forces, he had not a word to say and feared being spoken to; desire petrified his speech. Thus Jean-Jacques was solitary and sought solitude because there alone he was at his ease.

The doctor had seen, too late, the havoc wrought in his son by this temperament. He would have been glad to get him married; but to do that he must deliver him to an influence certain to become tyrannical, and the doctor hesitated. Was it not practically giving management of the property to a stranger? He knew how difficult it was to gain true indications of a woman’s moral character from studying a young girl. So, while searching for a daughter-in-law whose sentiments and education offered guarantees, he endeavored to push his son into avarice, meaning to give the poor fool an instinct that might take the place of intelligence.

He trained him in mechanical habits of life and instilled fixed ideas about investing revenues; he spared him chief difficulties of managing a fortune by leaving estates in good order and long-leased. Nevertheless, one fact escaped notice: Timidity, secretive like dissimulation, hid Jean-Jacques’s passionate love for the Rabouilleuse. Nothing, of course, could be more natural. Flore was the only woman living in the bachelor’s presence, the only one he could see at his ease; he secretly contemplated her at all hours. To him she was the light of his paternal home; she gave him the only pleasures that brightened his youth. Far from being jealous of his father, he rejoiced in the education the old man gave Flore: would it not make her easy to win? Passion that can reflect gives even ninnies a species of intelligence. In the lowest human creature we find an animal instinct whose persistency resembles thought.

The next day Flore, reflecting on his silence, waited for a momentous communication; though he kept near her and glanced at her with passion, Jean-Jacques found nothing to say. At last, when dessert was on the table, he recommenced the night-before scene.

“You like your life here?” he said.

“Yes, Monsieur Jean.”

“Well, stay here then.”

“Thank you, Monsieur Jean.”

This strange situation lasted three weeks. One night Flore, waking, heard regular breathing outside her door and, frightened, discovered Jean-Jacques crouched like a dog on the landing.

“He loves me,” she thought; “but he will get the rheumatism if he keeps it up.”

The next day Flore looked at her master with a certain expression. This mute almost instinctive love had touched her; she no longer thought him so ugly, though his forehead was crowned with pimples, signs of vitiated blood.

“You don’t want to go back to the fields, do you?” said Jean-Jacques when they were alone.

“Why do you ask me that?” she said.

“To know--” replied Rouget, turning the color of a boiled lobster.

“Do you wish to send me back?” she asked.

“No, mademoiselle.”

“Well, what is it you want to know? You have some reason--”

“Yes, I want to know--”

“What?” said Flore.

“You won’t tell me?” exclaimed Rouget.

“Yes I will, on my honor--”

“Ah! that’s it,” returned Rouget, with a frightened air. “Are you an honest girl?”

“I’ll take my oath--”

“Are you, truly?”

“Don’t you hear me tell you so?”

“Come; are you the same as when your uncle brought you here barefooted?”

“A fine question, faith!” cried Flore, blushing.

The heir lowered his head and did not raise it. Flore, amazed at such an encouraging sign from a man overcome by a fear of that nature, left the room.

Three days later, at dessert-time, Flore spoke first.

“Have you anything against me?”

“No, mademoiselle,” he answered, “No--” (a pause) “On the contrary.”

“You seemed annoyed the other day to hear I was an honest girl.”

“No, I only wished to know--” (a pause) “But you would not tell me--”

“On my word!” she said, “I will tell you the whole truth.”

“The whole truth about--my father?” he asked in a strangled voice.

“Your father,” she said, looking full into his eye, “was a worthy man--he liked a joke--What of that?--there was nothing in it. But, poor dear man, it wasn’t the will that was wanting. The truth is, he had some spite against you, I don’t know what, and he meant--oh! he meant you harm. Sometimes he made me laugh; but there! what of that?”

“Well, Flore,” said the heir, taking her hand, “as my father was nothing to you--”

“What did you suppose he was to me?” she cried, as if offended by an unworthy suspicion.

“Well, but just listen--”

“He was my benefactor, that was all. Ah! he would have liked to make me his wife, but--”

“But,” said Rouget, taking the hand Flore had snatched away, “if he was nothing to you you can stay here with me, can’t you?”

“If you wish it,” she said, dropping her eyes.

“No, no! if you wish it, you!” exclaimed Rouget. “Yes, you shall be mistress here. All that is here shall be yours; you shall take care of my property, it is almost yours now--for I love you; I have always loved you since the day you came and stood there--there!--with bare feet.”

Flore made no answer. When silence became embarrassing, Jean-Jacques had recourse to a terrible argument.

“Come,” he said, with visible warmth, “wouldn’t it be better than returning to the fields?”

“As you will, Monsieur Jean,” she answered.

Nevertheless, Jean-Jacques got no further. Men of his nature want certainty; the effort to avow their love costs so much they feel unable to go on. Ten months after his father’s death Jean-Jacques changed completely; his leaden face cleared, his whole countenance breathed happiness. Flore exacted that he should take care of his person, and her vanity was gratified seeing him well-dressed; she always stood on the sill to watch him start for a walk. The whole town noticed the changes that made a new man of the bachelor.

“Have you heard the news?” people said.

“What is it?”

“Jean-Jacques inherits everything from his father, even the Rabouilleuse.”

“Don’t you suppose the old doctor was wicked enough to provide a ruler for his son?”

“Rouget has got a treasure, that’s certain,” said everybody.

“She’s sly! She is very handsome, and she will make him marry her.”

“What luck that girl has had!”

“The luck that only comes to pretty girls.”

“Ah, bah! do you believe that? look at my uncle Borniche-Herau. You’ve heard of Mademoiselle Ganivet? she was as ugly as seven capital sins, but she got three thousand francs a year out of him.”

“Yes, but that was in 1778.”

“Still, Rouget is making a mistake. His father left him a good forty thousand francs’ income, and he ought to marry Mademoiselle Herau.”

“The doctor tried to arrange it, but she would not consent; Jean-Jacques is so stupid--”

“Stupid! why women are very happy with that style of man.”

“Is your wife happy?”

Such tattle ran through Issoudun. If people began by laughing at this quasi-marriage, they ended by praising Flore for devoting herself to the poor fellow. We now see how Flore obtained management of the Rouget household — from father to son, as young Goddet had said. It is desirable to sketch that management for the edification of old bachelors.

Fanchette, the cook, was the only person in Issoudun who thought it wrong that Flore should be queen over Jean-Jacques and his home. She protested against the immorality of the connection, taking a tone of injured virtue; the fact being she was humiliated by having, at her age, a crab-girl for a mistress — a child brought barefoot into the house. Fanchette owned three hundred francs a year in the Funds, for the doctor made her invest her savings, and he had left her as much more in an annuity; she could therefore live without working, and she quit the house nine months after the funeral, April 15, 1806. That date may indicate when Flore ceased to be an honest girl.

The Rabouilleuse, clever enough to foresee Fanchette’s probable defection — there is nothing like power for teaching policy — was resolved to do without a servant. For six months she had studied, without seeming to, the culinary operations that made Fanchette a cordon-bleu. In choice living, doctors are on a par with bishops. The doctor had honed Fanchette’s talents to perfection. In the provinces, lack of occupation turns activity of mind towards the kitchen. People do not dine as luxuriously as in Paris, but they dine better; dishes are studied. We often find some Careme in petticoats, an unrecognized genius able to serve a simple dish of haricot-beans worthy of Rossini’s nod.

When studying for his degree in Paris, the doctor had followed chemistry under Rouelle, and gathered ideas he later used in the chemistry of cooking. His memory is famous in Issoudun for certain improvements little known outside Berry. He discovered that an omelette is more delicate when whites and yolks are not beaten violently together; whites should be beaten to a froth and yolks added gently by degrees; moreover a frying-pan should never be used, but a “cagnard” of porcelain or earthenware. The “cagnard” is a thick dish standing on four feet so air circulates under it. The doctor had also found a way to prevent the tartness of browned butter; his secret, kept to his own kitchen, has been lost.

Flore, a born fryer and roaster, soon surpassed Fanchette. In making herself a cordon-bleu she thought of Jean-Jacques’s comfort; though dainty, she spent activity upon household matters. She rubbed up the furniture till it shone, and kept everything clean. She managed avalanches of soiled linen and the “wash,” done thrice a year by provincial usage. She mended linen carefully. Desirous of learning the family property’s secret, she acquired Rouget’s limited business knowledge, increased it by conversations with the notary Monsieur Heron, and gave excellent advice to Jean-Jacques. Sure of being always mistress, she was eager about the old bachelor’s interests as if they were her own. She was not obliged to guard against her uncle’s exactions, for two months before the doctor’s death Brazier died of a fall leaving a wine-shop, where, since his rise in fortune, he spent most of his time. Flore had also lost her father; thus she served her master with all the affection an orphan thankful to make herself a home would feel.

This period was paradise to poor Jean-Jacques, who acquired gentle habits of an animal, trained into monastic regularity. He slept late. Flore, up at daybreak attending housekeeping, woke him so he would find breakfast ready. After breakfast, about eleven, Jean-Jacques went to walk; talked with people he met, and came home at three to read the papers — those of the department and a Paris journal received three days late, well greased by many hands. The old bachelor thus got through the day until dinner; over that meal he spent as much time as possible. Flore told him town news, repeating carefully picked-up cackle. Towards eight the lights were put out. Going to bed early is a saving of fire and candles common in the provinces, which contributes to empty-mindedness. Too much sleep dulls the brain.

Such was their life for nine years, the great events being a few journeys to Bourges, Vierzon, Chateauroux, or farther if notaries had investments. Rouget lent his money at five percent on a first mortgage, with release of the wife’s rights if married. He never lent more than a third of a property’s value, and required notes payable to his order for an additional interest of two and a half percent over the loan. Such were his father’s rules. Usury, that clog upon peasantry ambition, is the destroyer of country regions. This levy of seven and a half percent seemed reasonable to borrowers, and Rouget had his choice of investments; notaries, who got fine commissions, notified the old bachelor.

During these nine years Flore obtained absolute control over her master. From the first she treated him familiarly; then, surpassing him in superiority of mind and force of character, he became in fact the servant of his servant. Elderly child that he was, he met this mastery half-way by letting Flore take such care of him that she treated him as a mother treats a son; he ended by clinging to her as a child dependent on a mother’s protection. Other ties bound them as well. Flore kept the house and managed all business. Jean-Jacques left everything to her so completely that life without her would have seemed impossible. In every way she had become his one need; she indulged all his fancies, knowing them well. He loved to see her bright face always smiling — the only face that had ever smiled upon him. This purely material happiness, expressed in homely provincial words, was like a reflection of his inward content. When Flore’s brightness was clouded, Jean-Jacques’s state revealed her power over him, and to make sure of it she sometimes used it. Using power means, with women of her class, abusing it. The Rabouilleuse no doubt made him play scenes buried in private life’s mysteries, where the magnificent and horrible meet. Flore felt so secure of her power that, unfortunately for both, it did not occur to her to make him marry her.

Towards the close of 1815, Flore, then twenty-seven, had reached full beauty. Plump and fresh, white as a Norman countrywoman, she was the ideal of a “buxom housewife.” Her beauty, that of a handsome barmaid though higher in type, gave her a likeness to Mademoiselle George in her prime, setting aside the latter’s imperial dignity. Flore had dazzling white round arms, ample modelling, satiny skin, and alluring outlines. Her expression was one of sweetness and tenderness; her glance evoked a vulgar joy rather than commanding respect. In 1816 the Rabouilleuse saw Maxence Gilet and fell in love at first sight. Her heart was cleft by the mythological arrow. Flore was too handsome to be disdained, and Max accepted his conquest.

Thus at twenty-eight the Rabouilleuse felt for the first time a true, idolatrous love. As soon as the penniless officer learned Flore and Jean-Jacques’s situations, he saw more than an “amourette” in intimacy with the Rabouilleuse. He asked nothing better than to take up abode at the Rougets’, recognizing the feeble nature of the old bachelor. Flore’s passion affected household affairs. For a month the old man, now excessive in timidity, saw the laughing kindly face of his mistress change to something gloomy and sullen. She made him endure flashes of temper like a married man whose wife meditates infidelity. When, after a cruel rebuff, he asked the reason of the change, her eyes were so full of hatred and her voice so contemptuous that he quailed.

“Good heavens!” she cried; “you have neither heart nor soul! Sixteen years I have spent my youth in this house, and I have only just found out you have a stone there (striking her breast). For two months you have seen that brave captain, a victim of the Bourbons, cut out for a general and down in poverty, hunted into a hole where there’s no way to make a penny! He’s forced to sit on a stool all day in the mayor’s office to earn—what? Six hundred miserable francs,—and here are you, with six hundred and fifty-nine thousand well invested, and sixty thousand francs’ income,—thanks to me, who never spend more than three thousand a year, everything included, even my own clothes,—and you never think of offering him a home here, though the second floor is empty! You’d rather rats and mice run riot in it than put a human being there,—and he a lad your father always allowed to be his own son! Do you want to know what you are? A fratricide! And I know why. You see I take an interest in him, and that provokes you. Stupid as you seem, you have more spite than the spitefullest of men. Well, yes! I do take an interest in him, and a keen one—”

“But, Flore—”

“‘But, Flore’ indeed! You may go and find another Flore (if you can!), for I hope this glass of wine may poison me if I don’t get away from your dungeon of a house. I haven’t, God be thanked, cost you one penny during twelve years I’ve been with you, and you have had my company into the bargain. I could have earned my living anywhere with the work I’ve done—washing, ironing, looking after linen, going to market, cooking, taking care of your interests before everything, slaving from morning till night—and this is my reward!”

“But, Flore—”

“Oh, yes, ‘Flore’! find another Flore, if you can, at your time of life, fifty-one and getting feeble,—for the way your health is failing is frightful, I know that! and besides, you are none too amusing—”

“But, Flore—”

“Let me alone!”

She went out, slamming the door with a violence that echoed through the house. Jean-Jacques softly opened and went, more softly, into the kitchen where she muttered.

“But, Flore,” said the poor sheep, “this is the first time I have heard of this wish of yours; how do you know whether I will agree?”

“In the first place,” she said, “there ought to be a man in the house. Everybody knows you have ten, fifteen, twenty thousand here; if they came to rob you we should both be murdered. For my part, I don’t care to wake up some fine morning chopped in quarters, as happened to that poor servant-girl who defended her master. Well! if robbers knew there was a man in the house as brave as Caesar—Max could swallow three burglars as quick as a flash—then I should sleep easy. People may talk—that I love him, that I adore him—and some say this and some that! Do you know what you ought to say? You ought to answer that your father told you on his deathbed to take care of his poor Max. That will stop tongues; every stone in Issoudun can tell you he paid Max’s schooling—and so! Here’s nine years I have eaten your bread—”

“Flore,—Flore!”

“—and many in this town have paid court to me! Gold chains here, watches there—what don’t they offer me? ‘My little Flore,’ they say, ‘why won’t you leave that old fool of a Rouget?’ ‘I leave him!’ I always answer, ‘a poor innocent like that? what would become of him? No, where the kid is tethered, let her browse—’”

“Yes, Flore; I’ve none but you in this world, and you make me happy. If it will give you pleasure, my dear, well, we will have Maxence Gilet here; he can eat with us—”

“Heavens! I should hope so!”

“There, there! don’t get angry—”

“Enough for one is enough for two,” she answered laughing. “I’ll tell you what you can do, my lamb. Go and walk near the Mayor’s office at four, and manage to meet Monsieur Gilet and invite him to dinner. If he makes excuses, tell him it will give me pleasure; he is too polite to refuse. After dinner, at dessert, if he tells you about his misfortunes, and the hulks and so forth—for you can easily get him to talk—then you can offer him to come and live here. If he objects, never mind; I shall know how to settle it.”

Walking slowly along boulevard Baron, the old celibate reflected, as much as he had mind to reflect, over this incident. If he were to part from Flore (the mere thought confused him) where could he find another woman? Should he marry? At his age he should be married for his money, and a legitimate wife would use him far more cruelly than Flore. Besides, being deprived of her tenderness, even if mere pretence, caused him horrible anguish. He was therefore as polite to Captain Gilet as he knew how. The invitation was given, as Flore had requested, before witnesses, to guard the hero’s honor.

A reconciliation took place; but from that day Jean-Jacques noticed many trifles that betokened a total change in his mistress’s affections. For two or three weeks Flore complained to tradespeople and women about Monsieur Rouget’s tyranny in inviting his natural brother to live with him. No one was taken in by the comedy; Flore was looked upon as a wonderfully clever, artful creature. Old Rouget really found himself comfortable after Max became master of his house; he gained a companion who paid him attentions without showing servility. Gilet talked, discussed politics, and sometimes walked with Rouget. After Max was installed, Flore did not choose to do cooking; she said it spoiled her hands. At the request of the grand master of the Order of the Knights of Idleness, Mere Cognette produced a relative, an old maid whose master, a curate, had lately died without leaving her anything,—an excellent cook who declared she would devote herself for life or death to Max and Flore. In the name of the two powers, Mere Cognette promised her an annuity of three hundred francs a year at the end of ten years if she served loyally and discreetly. The Vedie, as she was called, had a face pitted by smallpox and was ugly.

After the new cook entered upon her duties, the Rabouilleuse took the title Madame Brazier. She wore corsets; she had silk, or handsome woollen and cotton dresses, expensive neckerchiefs, embroidered caps and collars, lace ruffles at her throat, boots instead of shoes, and adopted richness and elegance renewing her youthfulness. She was like a rough diamond needing cutting to bring out full value. Her desire was to do honor to Max. At the end of the first year, in 1817, she brought a horse, called English, from Bourges for the poor cavalry captain, weary of walking. Max had picked up in Issoudun an old lancer of the Imperial Guard, a Pole named Kouski, now very poor, who asked nothing better than to quarter himself in Rouget’s house as the captain’s servant. Max idolized Kouski, especially after the duel with three royalists. So, from 1817, the household was made up of five persons, three of whom were masters, and expenses advanced to about eight thousand francs a year.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER X

At the time Madame Bridau returned to Issoudun to save—Maitre Desroches said—an inheritance in danger, Jean-Jacques Rouget had gradually become semi-vegetative. After Max’s instalment, Flore set the table on an episcopal footing. Rouget, exposed to good living, ate more and more, tempted by the Vedie’s excellent dishes. He did not grow fatter; he weakened daily, fatigued perhaps by digestion, and his eyes had dark circles. When neighbors questioned him, he always said he was never better. Thought mentally deficient, people did not notice his declining faculties. His love for Flore kept him alive; he existed only for her, obeying her slightest look, watching her like a dog. As Madame Hochon remarked, at fifty-seven he seemed older than Monsieur Hochon, an octogenarian.

Everyone supposed, rightly, that Max’s appartement matched his charm. In six years our captain had improved the comfort and adorned it for himself and Flore. But it was only Issoudun luxury—colored tiles, somewhat elegant wallpapers, mahogany furniture, gilt mirrors, muslin curtains with red borders, a canopy bed, provincial draperies—luxury in Issoudun though common in Paris. One unusual thing caused talk: a rush-matting on the stairs, doubtless to muffle footsteps. Max came in at daybreak without waking anyone; Rouget did not suspect his guest was an accomplice in the Knights of Idleness’ nocturnal performances.

About eight the next morning Flore, in a cotton dressing-gown with narrow pink stripes, a lace cap, and furred slippers, softly opened Max’s door; seeing him asleep she stood beside the bed.

“He came in so late!” she thought. “Half-past three. He must have a good constitution. I wonder what they did last night.”

“Oh, there you are, my little Flore!” said Max, waking like a soldier trained to be ready instantly.

“You are sleepy; I’ll go away.”

“No, stay; there’s something serious going on.”

“Were you up to mischief last night?”

“Ah, bah! It concerns you and me and that old fool. You never told me he had a family! Well, his family are coming—coming here—no doubt to turn us out.”

“Ah! I’ll shake him well,” said Flore.

“Mademoiselle Brazier,” said Max gravely, “things are too serious for giddiness. Send me my coffee; I’ll take it in bed and think over what we had better do. Come back at nine and we’ll talk. Meanwhile, act as if you’ve heard nothing.”

Frightened, Flore went to make his coffee; a quarter-hour later Baruch burst into Max’s room, crying to the grand master,—

“Fario is hunting for his barrow!”

In five minutes Max was dressed and in the street; though he sauntered, he soon reached the tower embankment, where a crowd had gathered.

“What is it?” asked Max, pushing through and reaching the Spaniard.

Fario was a withered little man, ugly as though blue-blooded grandee. His fiery, close-set eyes were piercing; calm, slow in movement, people called him “goodman Fario.” His gingerbread skin and gentle manner hid a half-Moorish peasant nature from Granada, long unroused from phlegmatic indolence.

“Are you sure,” Max asked after hearing his grievance, “that you left your cart here? There are no thieves in Issoudun.”

“I left it just there—”

“If the horse was harnessed, hasn’t he drawn it somewhere?”

“Here’s the horse,” said Fario, pointing to the animal harnessed thirty feet away.

Max gravely went to where the horse stood, from which one could see the bottom of the tower at the top of the embankment; the crowd followed, as the scoundrel wanted.

“Has anybody thoughtlessly put a cart in his pocket?” cried Francois.

“Turn out your pockets, all of you!” said Baruch.

Laughter rose. Fario swore; with a Spaniard oaths mark high anger.

“Was your cart light?” asked Max.

“Light!” cried Fario. “If those who laugh had it on their feet, their corns would never hurt them again.”

“Well, it must be devilishly light,” answered Max, “for look there!” pointing to the foot of the tower; “it has flown up the embankment.”

All eyes lifted, and for a moment there was uproar in the market-place. Each pointed at the bewitched barrow and talked.

“The devil makes common cause with the inn-keepers,” said Goddet to the astonished Spaniard. “He means to teach you not to leave your cart about in the streets, but to put it in the tavern stables.”

The crowd hooted; Fario was thought a miser.

“Come, my good fellow,” said Max, “don’t lose heart. We’ll go up and see how your barrow got there. Thunder and cannon! we’ll lend you a hand! Come along, Baruch.”

“As for you,” he whispered to Francois, “get the people to stand back, and make sure there is nobody at the foot of the embankment when you see us at the top.”

Fario, Max, Baruch, and three other knights climbed. During the perilous ascent Max and Fario noticed no trace of the barrow’s passage; Fario imagined witchcraft and lost his head. At the top it seemed impossible the cart had got there.

“How shall I ever get it down?” said the Spaniard, whose small eyes for the first time showed fear; his yellow face whitened.

“How?” said Max. “Why, that’s not difficult.”

Taking advantage of Fario’s stupefaction, he raised the barrow by the shafts with his robust arms and prepared to fling it down, calling as it left his grasp, “Look out there, below!”

No accident happened; the crowd, persuaded by Francois and curious, had retired to a distance. The cart dashed to pieces in a very picturesque manner.

“There! you have got it down,” said Baruch.

“Ah, brigands! ah, scoundrels!” cried Fario; “perhaps it was you who brought it up here!”

Max, Baruch, and their comrades laughed at the Spaniard’s rage.

“I wanted to do you a service,” said Max coolly, “and in handling the damned thing I came very near flinging myself after it; and this is how you thank me, is it? What country do you come from?”

“I come from a country where they never forgive,” replied Fario, trembling. “My cart will be the cab in which you shall drive to the devil!—unless,” he suddenly grew meek, “you give me a new one.”

“We will talk about that,” said Max, descending.

At the bottom Max took Fario by the jacket and said,—

“Yes, my good Fario, I’ll give you a magnificent cart, if you will give me two hundred and fifty francs; but I won’t warrant it to go, like this one, up a tower.”

At this jest Fario cooled as though making a bargain.

“Damn it!” he said, “give me the wherewithal to replace my barrow, and it will be the best use you ever made of old Rouget’s money.”

Max turned livid; he raised his fist to strike, but Baruch, knowing the blow would be misdirected, plucked Fario away and whispered,—

“Don’t commit such a folly!”

Called to order, the grand master laughed and said to Fario,—

“If I, by accident, broke your barrow, and you try to slander me, we are quits.”

“Not yet,” muttered Fario. “But I am glad to know what my barrow was worth.”

“Ah, Max, you’ve found your match!” said a spectator not of the Order.

“Adieu, Monsieur Gilet. I haven’t thanked you yet for lending me a hand,” cried the Spaniard, as he kicked his horse and vanished amid hurrahs.

“We will keep the tires of the wheels for you,” shouted a wheelwright who had come to inspect the damage.

One shaft stuck upright in the ground as straight as a tree. Max stood by, pale and thoughtful, annoyed by Fario’s speech. For five days the Spaniard’s barrow was all Issoudun talked of; Goddet said it would travel abroad—indeed the tale reached Berry, and in a week the affair, to Fario’s satisfaction, was the talk of three departments. Because of the Spaniard’s vindictive speech, Max and the Rabouilleuse were whispered about in Issoudun and openly discussed in Bourges, Vatan, Vierzon, and Chateauroux. Maxence Gilet knew how envenomed such comments would become.

“We can’t stop their tongues,” he said. “Ah! I did a foolish thing!”

“Max!” said Francois, taking his arm. “They are coming to-night.”

“They! Who!”

“The Bridaus. My grandmother has had a letter from her goddaughter.”

“Listen, my boy,” said Max low. “I have been thinking deeply. Neither Flore nor I ought to seem opposed to the Bridaus. If these heirs are to be got rid of, it is for you Hochons to drive them out. Find out what sort of people they are. Tomorrow at Mere Cognette’s, after I’ve taken their measure, we can decide what to do, and how to set your grandfather against them.”

“The Spaniard found the flaw in Max’s armor,” said Baruch to his cousin Francois as they turned into Monsieur Hochon’s and watched their comrade entering his own door.

While Max was thus occupied, Flore, despite advice, could not restrain her wrath and burst upon the poor bachelor. When Jean-Jacques incurred her anger, his little attentions and vulgar fondlings—his joy—were suppressed. Flore sent him, as children say, into disgrace. No more tender glances or caressing words—“my kitten,” “my old darling,” “my bibi,” “my rat”—were heard. A cold, sharp, ironic “you” cut through the heart of the miserable old bachelor; the “you” was a declaration of war. Instead of helping him with his toilet, handing what he wanted, forestalling his wishes, or admiring him—“You look as fresh as a rose!”—she left him to dress alone. If he called, she answered from the foot of the stairs, “I can’t do everything at once; how can I look after your breakfast and wait upon you? Are not you big enough to dress yourself?”

“Oh, dear! what have I done to displease her?” he asked that morning, after a rebuff when calling for shaving-water.

“Vedie, take up the hot water,” cried Flore.

“Vedie!” exclaimed the poor man, stupefied. “Vedie, what is the matter with Madame this morning?”

Flore Brazier required her master, Vedie, Kouski, and Max to call her Madame.

“She seems to have heard something about you which isn’t to your credit,” Vedie said, pretending great concern. “I’m only a poor servant and have no right to poke my nose; but I say you may search through all the women and you won’t find the equal of Madame. You ought to kiss the ground she steps on. Goodness! if you make her unhappy, you’ll only spoil your own life. There she is, poor thing, with her eyes full of tears.”

Vedie left the poor man cast down; he dropped into an armchair and stared into vacancy like the melancholy imbecile he was, and forgot to shave. These alternations of tenderness and severity had on this feeble creature, whose only life was through his amorous fibre, the same morbid effect that sudden climatic changes have on the body. It was a moral pleurisy wearing him out like disease. Flore alone could thus affect him; to her and her alone he was as good as foolish.

“Well, haven’t you shaved yet?” she said, appearing at his door.

Her sudden presence made him start; from pale and cast down he grew red, yet dared not complain.

“Your breakfast is waiting,” she added. “You can come down as you are, in dressing-gown and slippers; for you’ll breakfast alone, I can tell you.”

Without waiting, she disappeared. To breakfast alone was his worst punishment; he loved to talk to her as he ate. At the foot of the stairs he was seized with a coughing fit; emotion excited his catarrh.

“Cough away!” said Flore in the kitchen, without caring if he heard. “Confound the old wretch! he is able enough to get over it without bothering others. If he coughs up his soul, it will only be after—”

Such were the amenities the Rabouilleuse addressed to Rouget when angry. The poor man sat in deep distress at a corner of the table and looked at his old furniture and pictures with a disconsolate air.

“You might at least have put on a cravat,” said Flore. “Do you think it pleasant for people to see such a neck as yours, redder and more wrinkled than a turkey’s?”

“But what have I done?” he asked, lifting his big light-green eyes, full of tears, to her and trying to meet her hard countenance.

“What have you done?” she exclaimed. “As if you didn’t know! Your sister Agathe—who is as much your sister as I am sister of the tower of Issoudun, if one’s to believe your father, and who has no claim at all upon you—is coming from Paris with her son, a miserable two-penny painter, to see you.”

“My sister and my nephews coming to Issoudun!” he said, bewildered.

“Oh, yes! play surprised; try to make me believe you didn’t send for them! Don’t fash yourself; we won’t trouble your Parisians—before they set their feet in this house we shall have shaken the dust off ours. Max and I will be gone, never to return. As for your will, I’ll tear it in quarters under your nose and to your very beard—do you hear? Leave your property to your family if you don’t think we are your family; and then see if you’ll be loved for yourself by a lot of people who have not seen you for thirty years—who in fact have never seen you! Is that the sort of sister who can take my place? A pinchbeck saint!”

“If that’s all, my little Flore,” said the old man, “I won’t receive my sister, or my nephews. I swear this is the first I heard of their coming. It is all got up by Madame Hochon—a sanctimonious old—”

Max, who had overheard, entered suddenly and said in a masterful tone,—

“What’s all this?”

“My good Max,” said the old man, glad for the soldier’s protection who by agreement with Flore always took his side, “I swear by all that is most sacred, I now hear this news for the first time. I never wrote to my sister; my father made me promise not to leave her any property; to leave it to the Church sooner than to her. Well, I won’t receive my sister Agathe or her sons—”

“Your father was wrong, my dear Jean-Jacques, and Madame Brazier is still more wrong,” answered Max. “Your father no doubt had his reasons, but he is dead, and his hatred should die with him. Your sister is your sister, and your nephews your nephews. You owe it to yourself to welcome them, and you owe it to us as well. What would people say in Issoudun? Thunder! I’ve enough on my shoulders, without hearing people say we shut you up and don’t allow you a will of your own, or that we influence you against your relations and are trying to get hold of your property. The devil take me if I don’t pull up stakes if calumny is flung at me! the other is bad enough! Let’s eat our breakfast.”

Flore, now mild as a weasel, helped Vedie set the table. Old Rouget, full of admiration for Max, took him by both hands and led him to a window recess, saying low,—

“Ah! Max, if I had a son, I couldn’t love him better than I love you. Flore is right: you two are my real family. You are a man of honor, Max, and what you have just said is true.”

“You ought to receive and entertain your sister and her son, but not change your arrangements about property,” Max said. “In that way you will do right in the world’s eyes and yet keep your promise to your father.”

“Well! my dear loves!” cried Flore gayly, “the salmi is getting cold. Come, my old rat, here’s a wing for you,” she said, smiling on Jean-Jacques.

At the words the long-drawn face lost its cadaverous tints, a smile flickered on his lips; but he had another fit of coughing; joy excited as violent an emotion as punishment. Flore rose, pulled a little cashmere shawl from her shoulders, and tied it round his throat, exclaiming: “How silly to put yourself in such a way about nothing. There, you old goose, that will do you good; it has been next my heart—”

“What a good creature!” said Rouget to Max, while Flore fetched a black velvet cap for the nearly bald head.

“As good as she is beautiful,” answered Max, “but she is quick-tempered, like all people who carry their hearts in their hands.”

This bald sketch may displease some who think Flore’s flashes of character should be left in shadow. Well! this scene, played again and again with shocking variations, is, in its coarse way and horrible veracity, the type of scenes women enact on whatever social rung when any interest draws them from obedience and induces them to grasp power. In their eyes, as in politicians’, all means justify the end. Between Flore Brazier and a duchess, between a duchess and the richest bourgeoise, between a bourgeoise and the luxuriously kept mistress, differences are those of education and surroundings. The pouting of a fine lady is the same as the violence of a Rabouilleuse. At all levels, bitter sayings, ironical jests, cold contempt, hypocritical complaints, false quarrels win as much success as low outbursts of this Madame Everard of Issoudun.

Max began to relate, with humor, Fario and his barrow, making the old man laugh. Vedie and Kouski in the kitchen exploded, and Flore laughed convulsively. After breakfast, while Jean-Jacques read the newspapers (they subscribed to the Constitutionel and the Pandore), Max carried Flore to his quarters.

“Are you sure he has not made any other will since the one leaving property to you?”

“He hasn’t anything to write with,” she answered.

“He might have dictated it to some notary,” said Max; “we must look out for that. Therefore be cordial to the Bridaus, and at the same time turn those mortgages into money. The notaries will be glad to make the transfers; it is grist to their mill. The Funds are rising; we shall conquer Spain, deliver Ferdinand VII and the Cortez, and they will be above par. You and I could make a good thing by putting the old fellow’s seven hundred and fifty thousand francs into the Funds at eighty-nine. Only you must try to get it done in your name; it will be so much secured anyhow.”

“A capital idea!” said Flore.

“And as there will be an income of fifty thousand francs from eight hundred and ninety thousand, we must make him borrow one hundred and forty thousand francs for two years, to be paid back in two instalments. In two years, we shall get one hundred thousand francs in Paris, and ninety thousand here, and risk nothing.”

“If it were not for you, my handsome Max, what would become of me now?” she said.

“Oh! tomorrow night at Mere Cognette’s, after I have seen the Parisians, I shall find a way to make the Hochons themselves get rid of them.”

“Ah! what a head you’ve got, my angel! You are a love of a man.”

The place Saint-Jean is at the centre of a long street called at the upper end rue Grand Narette, and at the lower rue Petite Narette. “Narette” in Berry expresses a steep street. The Grand Narette rises rapidly from place Saint-Jean to the port Vilatte. The house of old Monsieur Hochon is exactly opposite Jean-Jacques Rouget’s. From Madame Hochon’s usual sitting-room it was easy to see what went on at the Rouget household, and vice versa, when curtains were drawn back or doors left open. The Hochon house resembled the Rouget house; doubtless the same architect built both. Monsieur Hochon, formerly tax-collector at Selles in Berry, born at Issoudun, had returned home and married the sister of the sub-delegate, the gay Lousteau, exchanging his office at Selles for one at Issoudun. Having retired before 1787, he escaped the Revolution’s dangers, to whose principles, however, he adhered like other “honest men” who howl with the winners. Monsieur Hochon had the reputation of miser; a single episode will show him.

At his daughter’s wedding, necessary to give a dinner to the Borniche family, the bridegroom, heir to a large fortune, had mismanaged his property and been mortified by his parents’ refusal to help. The old people were delighted to see Monsieur Hochon step in as guardian to secure his daughter’s dowry. While the marriage contract was solemnly read by young Heron, the notary, the cook came in and asked Monsieur Hochon for some twine to truss the turkey—an essential of the repast. The old man dove into his coat and gave an end of string already used to tie a parcel, and before she left the room called out, “Gritte, mind you give it back to me!” (Gritte is Berry for Marguerite.)

Year by year Hochon grew more petty and penurious; at eighty-five he belonged to men who stop mid-conversation to pick up a pin, remarking as they stick it in their coat sleeve, “There’s the wife’s stipend.” He complained of cloth quality and how his coat had lasted ten years. Tall, gaunt, thin, sallow; saying little, reading little, doing nothing to fatigue himself; observant of forms, he enforced at home strict abstemious discipline, weighing and measuring food and drink for his family: his wife née Lousteau, his grandson Borniche with a sister Adolphine, heirs of old Borniche, and his other grandson Francois Hochon.

Hochon’s eldest son, taken by the 1813 draft which drew sons of well-to-do families into the “guards of honor,” was killed at Hanau. He had married early a rich woman to avoid conscription; after enrolment he wasted his substance, foreseeing his end. His wife, who followed the army at a distance, died at Strasburg in 1814, leaving debts Hochon refused to pay—answering creditors with an axiom: “Women are minors.”

The house, though large, was scantily furnished; on the second floor two rooms suited Madame Bridau and Joseph. Old Hochon repented having kept them with two beds, each with an old armchair of natural wood covered with needlework, and a walnut table with a wide-mouthed water-pitcher in a basin. He kept winter stores of apples, pears, medlars, and quinces on heaps of straw in these rooms where rats and mice ran riot, exhaling a mixed odor of fruit and vermin. Madame Hochon directed everything be cleaned; wallpaper fastened with wafers; she decorated windows with curtains pieced from old hoards. Denied a strip of drugget, she laid her bedside carpet for little Agathe—“Poor little thing!” she said—who was now over forty-seven. Madame Hochon borrowed two night-tables from a neighbor and boldly hired two chests of drawers with brass handles from a second-hand dealer next to Mere Cognette. She had preserved two candlesticks carved in choice woods by her father, who had the “turning” mania; from 1770 to 1780 it was fashionable for rich people to learn a trade, and Monsieur Lousteau had been a turner. These candlesticks were ornamented with circlets from roots of rose, peach, and apricot trees. Madame Hochon actually risked using her relics. These preparations and sacrifices increased old Hochon’s anxiety; until now he had not believed the Bridaus’ arrival.

The morning of the Fario trick Madame Hochon said after breakfast,—

“I hope, Hochon, you will receive my goddaughter, Madame Bridau, properly.” Then, making sure her grandchildren were out of hearing, she added, “I am mistress of my own property; don’t oblige me to make up to Agathe in my will for any incivility on your part.”

“Do you think, madame,” answered Hochon mildly, “that at my age I don’t know forms of decent civility?”

“You know very well what I mean, you crafty old thing! Be friendly to our guests, and remember I love Agathe.”

“And you love Maxence Gilet also, who is getting the property away from your dear Agathe! Ah! you’ve warmed a viper in your bosom; but after all, the Rouget money is bound to go to a Lousteau.”

Having said this about Max and Agathe, Hochon turned to leave; but Madame Hochon, still erect and spare, wearing a round cap with ribbon knots, powdered hair, a taffeta petticoat of changeable colors like a pigeon’s breast, tight sleeves, and high-heeled slippers, placed her snuff-box on a little table and said,—

“Really, Monsieur Hochon, how can a man of your sense repeat absurdities which cost my poor friend her peace and Agathe the property she ought to have had from her father. Max Gilet is not the son of my brother, whom I often advised to save the money he paid for him. You know as well as I do that Madame Rouget was virtue itself—”

“And the daughter takes after her; for she strikes me as uncommonly stupid. After losing all her fortune, she brings her sons up so well that here is one in prison and likely to be indicted before the Court of Peers for a conspiracy worthy of Berton. As for the other, he is worse—a painter. If your protégés stay here till they have extricated that fool Rouget from Gilet and the Rabouilleuse, we shall eat a good deal more than half a measure of salt with them.”

“That’s enough, Monsieur Hochon; you had better wish they may not have two strings to their bow.”

Monsieur Hochon took his hat and his cane with an ivory knob and went away petrified by that speech; he had no idea his wife could show such resolution. Madame Hochon took her prayer-book to read the service; her age prevented daily church attendance; she got there with difficulty on Sundays. Since receiving her goddaughter’s letter she had added a petition to her prayers, supplicating God to open Jean-Jacques Rouget’s eyes, bless Agathe, and prosper the expedition she had drawn her into. Concealing the fact from her grandchildren, whom she accused of being “parpaillots,” she had asked the curate to say a mass for Agathe’s success during a neuvaine held by her granddaughter Adolphine Borniche, who thus made her prayers in church by proxy.

Adolphine, then eighteen, who for seven years had sewn at her grandmother’s side in that cold household of monotony and method, undertook the neuvaine hoping to inspire some feeling in Joseph Bridau, in whom she took an interest because of the monstrosities her grandfather attributed to the young Parisian.

All the old and sensible people of the town and fathers of families approved Madame Hochon’s conduct in receiving her goddaughter; their good wishes for her success matched the secret contempt for Maxence Gilet’s conduct. Thus news of Rouget’s sister and nephew raised two parties in Issoudun—the higher and older bourgeoisie, who offered good wishes and watched without assisting, and the Knights of Idleness and Max’s partisans, who were capable of high-handed outrages against the Parisians.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XI

Agathe and Joseph arrived at the coach-office of the Messageries-Royales in the place Misere at three o’clock. Though tired, Madame Bridau felt her youth revive at sight of her native land, where each step recalled girlish memories. In Issoudun public opinion spread news quickly; the Parisians’ arrival was known in ten minutes. Madame Hochon came to the door to welcome her godchild and kissed her as if she were a daughter. After seventy-two years of a barren life, marked by the graves of three unhappy, dead children, she had cherished this early friendship as if Agathe had remained near her, and she had also taken the deepest interest in Bridau. Agathe was led triumphant into the salon where Monsieur Hochon sat, chilling as a tepid oven.

“Here is Monsieur Hochon; how does he seem to you?” his wife asked.

“Precisely the same as when I last saw him,” said Agathe.

“Ah! it is easy to see you come from Paris; you are so complimentary,” remarked the old man.

Presentations followed: first Baruch Borniche, a tall youth of twenty-two; then Francois Hochon, twenty-four; and lastly little Adolphine, blushing and awkward, anxious not to seem to look at Joseph Bridau, who in turn was narrowly observed from different points of view by the two young men and old Hochon. The miser thought, “He’s just out of the hospital; he’ll be as hungry as a convalescent.” The young men muttered, “What a head! what a brigand! we shall have our hands full!”

“This is my son, the painter; my good Joseph,” said Agathe, presenting him. The emphasis on “good” betrayed the mother’s heart, whose thoughts were really in the Luxembourg prison.

“He looks ill,” said Madame Hochon; “he is not at all like you.”

“No, madame,” said Joseph, with the brusque candor of an artist; “I am like my father, and very ugly at that.”

Madame Hochon pressed Agathe’s hand and gazed at her as if to say, “Ah! my child; I understand now why you prefer your good-for-nothing Philippe.”

“I never saw your father, my dear boy,” she added aloud; “it is enough to make me love you that you are your mother’s son. Besides, you have talent, so the late Madame Descoings used to write to me; she was the only one in late years who told me much about you.”

“Talent!” exclaimed Joseph, “not yet; but with time and patience I may win fame and fortune.”

“By painting?” Monsieur Hochon sneered.

“Come, Adolphine,” said Madame Hochon, “go and see about dinner.”

“Mother,” said Joseph, “I will attend to the trunks.”

“Hochon,” said the grandmother to Francois, “show the rooms to Monsieur Bridau.”

It was half past three and dinner at four; Baruch rushed into town to tell of the Bridau arrival, describe Agathe’s dress, and especially paint Joseph’s haggard, determined face—like a brigand’s. That evening Joseph was talked about in every household.

“That sister of Rouget must have seen a monkey before her son was born,” said one; “he’s the image of a baboon.”

“He has the face of a brigand and the eyes of a basilisk.”

“All artists are like that.”

“They are spiteful as monkeys.”

“I have just seen Monsieur Beaussier, and he says he would not like to meet him in a dark wood; he saw him in the diligence.”

“He has hollows over the eyes like a horse, and he laughs like a maniac.”

“The fellow looks capable of anything; perhaps he ruined his fine brother. Poor Madame Bridau doesn’t seem happy with him.”

“Suppose we take advantage of his being here, and have our portraits painted?”

Curiosity flared. Those entitled to visit the Hochons resolved to call that night and examine the Parisians. Their arrival in the stagnant town was like dropping a beam among frogs.

After stowing trunks into the attic chambers, which he inspected, Joseph noted the silent house—the walls, staircase, woodwork utterly plain and damp, with nothing beyond bare necessities. He felt the sharp transition from poetic Paris to arid province; coming downstairs and seeing Monsieur Hochon slicing bread for each person, he understood Moliere’s Harpagon.

“We should have done better to go to an inn,” he thought.

Dinner confirmed his fears. A watery soup showed quantity favored over quality; bouilli was ceremoniously garnished with parsley and held the table’s center. Vegetables were served separately and counted as items of the repast. The bouilli’s place was accompanied by three other dishes: hard-boiled eggs on sorrel, a salad dressed with nut-oil, and little cups of custard flavored with burnt oats serving for vanilla, like chicory coffee to mocha. Butter and radishes were at each end, with pickled gherkins and horseradish; Madame Hochon approved, nodding contentedly at her husband. He answered with a shrug that meant, “See the extravagances you force me to commit!”

After Monsieur Hochon slivered the bouilli into slices about as thick as a dancing-shoe sole, it was replaced with three pigeons. The wine was country vintage 1811. Adolphine had decorated each end of the table with a bunch of flowers.

“At Rome as the Romans do,” thought the artist, and began to eat—like a man who had breakfasted at Vierzon on an execrable cup of coffee. When Joseph, having eaten all his bread, asked for more, Monsieur Hochon slowly searched his pockets for a key, unlocked a cupboard, broke off a section of a twelve-pound loaf, cut a round, divided it, laid the pieces on a plate, and passed it across the table with the silence of an old soldier meeting death calmly. Joseph took the half-slice and understood that asking for more was forbidden. No one was surprised. Conversation went on. Agathe learned that her birth house had been bought by the Borniches; she wished to see it.

“No doubt,” said her godmother, “the Borniches will be here this evening; we shall have half the town—who want to examine you,” she added, turning to Joseph, “and they will all invite you.”

Gritte, the sixty-year-old servant, brought dessert—the famous ripe cheese of Touraine and Berry, with mouldy discolorations resembling vine-leaves; she placed nuts and time-honored biscuits beside them.

“Well, Gritte, the fruit?” asked Madame Hochon.

“But, madame, there is none rotten,” answered Gritte.

Joseph burst into roars of laughter as among his atelier comrades; he perceived that parsimony in eating only fruits beginning to rot had become settled habit.

“Bah! we can eat them all the same,” he exclaimed.

“Monsieur Hochon, pray get some,” said the old lady.

Monsieur Hochon, much incensed, fetched peaches, pears, and Saint Catherine plums.

“Adolphine, go and gather some grapes,” Madame Hochon ordered her granddaughter.

Joseph looked at the two young men as if to say: “Is it to such fare you owe your healthy faces?” Baruch smiled; he and his cousin had been moderate and frequented Mere Cognette’s for feasts. Just before dinner, Baruch had been told the grand master convoked the Order at midnight for a magnificent supper and a great enterprise. The feast of welcome at the Hochons explains the need for nocturnal repasts for two young fellows blessed with appetites, who never missed them.

“We will take the liqueur in the salon,” said Madame Hochon, rising and motioning Joseph to give her his arm. As they went out before the others she whispered to him:

“Eh! my poor boy; this dinner won’t give you indigestion; I had hard work to get it for you. It is always Lent here; you will get enough just to keep life in you, and no more. So you must bear it patiently.”

The old woman’s kindness pleased Joseph.

“I have lived fifty years with that man, without ever hearing half-a-dozen gold pieces chink in my purse,” she went on. “Oh! if I did not hope that you might save your property, I would never have brought you and your mother into my prison.”

“But how can you survive it?” cried Joseph naively.

“Ah, you may well ask!” she said. “I pray.”

Joseph quivered at the words, which raised her in his estimation; he stepped back to look into her face. “Let me paint your portrait,” he said.

“No, no,” she answered, “I am too weary of life to wish to remain here on canvas.”

Gayly uttering the sad thing, she opened a closet and brought out a flask of ratafia she made from a nuns’ recipe, the same source for Issoudun’s celebrated cake; Monsieur de Riviere ordered quantities yearly for the Seraglio.

Adolphine held a lacquer tray of little engraved glasses; as her mother filled and handed them around, Agathe remarked, “It seems as though my father’s turn were coming round!” This immutable provincial custom recalled her youth.

“Hochon will go to his club presently to read the papers, and we shall have a little time to ourselves,” said the old lady quietly.

Ten minutes later three women and Joseph were alone in the salon, where the floor was only swept, and the worsted-work designs and plain, dismal furniture seemed exactly as when Agathe left. Monarchy, Revolution, Empire, and Restoration had left no trace in this room.

“Ah! my godmother, compared with your life, mine has been cruelly tried,” exclaimed Madame Bridau, surprised to find even a canary she knew stuffed on the mantelshelf among the old clock, brass brackets, and silver candlesticks.

“My child,” said the old lady, “trials are in the heart. The greater the need for resignation, the harder the struggle with ourselves. But don’t speak of me, let us talk of your affairs. You are directly in front of the enemy,” she added, pointing to the Rouget windows.

“They are sitting down to dinner,” said Adolphine.

The young girl, destined for a cloister, looked constantly out the window, hoping to hear more about the enormities imputed to Maxence Gilet, the Rabouilleuse, and Jean-Jacques. The old lady told her granddaughter to leave her and Agathe alone until visitors arrived. “We shall have ten or twelve batches of inquisitive folk here tonight,” she said.

Madame Hochon then recounted Maxence’s influence over Jean-Jacques Rouget and the Rabouilleuse’s doings, with all the town’s embroidered comments. Adolphine announced the approach of the Borniche, Beaussier, Lousteau-Prangin, Fichet, Goddet-Herau families—fourteen persons in all.

“You now see, my dear child,” said the old lady, “that it will not be easy to get this property out of the wolf’s jaws—”

“It seems so difficult—with a scoundrel such as you represent him, and a daring woman like that crab-girl—as to be actually impossible,” Joseph remarked. “We should have to stay a year in Issoudun to counteract their influence and overthrow their dominion over my uncle. Money isn’t worth such a struggle—not to speak of the meannesses to which we should have to stoop. My mother has only two weeks’ leave; her place is permanent and must not be risked. As for me, in October I have an important work Schinner has obtained for me from a peer of France; my future fortune is in my brushes.”

Madame Hochon was amazed; though relatively superior to the town, she did not believe in painting. She glanced at her goddaughter and pressed her hand.

“This Maxence is the second volume of Philippe,” whispered Joseph to his mother, “only cleverer and better behaved. Well, madame,” he added aloud, “we won’t trouble Monsieur Hochon by staying long.”

“Ah! you are young; you know nothing of the world,” said the old lady. “A couple of weeks, if judicious, may produce great results; listen to my advice, and act accordingly.”

“Oh! willingly,” said Joseph. “I know I have an amazing incapacity for domestic statesmanship: for example, I’m sure I don’t know what Desroches himself would tell us to do if my uncle declines to see us.”

Mesdames Borniche, Goddet-Herau, Beaussier, Lousteau-Prangin and Fichet, with their husbands, entered the room.

When the fourteen were seated and compliments over, Madame Hochon presented Agathe and Joseph. Joseph sat in his armchair all evening, slyly studying the sixty faces which, from five until half-past nine, posed for him gratis, as he later told his mother. Such behavior before Issoudun’s aristocracy did not change its opinion of him: everyone went home ruffled by his sarcastic glances, uneasy under his smiles, and even frightened at his sinister face, which a class unable to recognize genius found alarming.

After ten, when the household slept, Madame Hochon kept her goddaughter in her chamber until midnight. Secure from interruption the two women exchanged sorrows. As Agathe listened to the last echoes of a soul that had missed its destiny and felt the sufferings of a generous heart whose charity could never be exercised, she perceived the immensity of the desert in which this noble, unrecognized soul had been wasted, and knew that she, with city life’s small joys, was not the most unhappy.

“You who are so pious,” she said, “explain my shortcomings; tell me what God punishes in me.”

“He is preparing us, my child,” answered the old woman, “for the striking of the last hour.”

At midnight the Knights of Idleness collected one by one like shadows under the boulevard Baron trees, whispering.

“What are we going to do?” each asked on arriving.

“I think,” said Francois, “Max means merely to give us a supper.”

“No; matters are serious for him and the Rabouilleuse: he has concocted some scheme against the Parisians.”

“It would be a good joke to drive them away.”

“My grandfather,” said Baruch, “is terribly alarmed at having two extra mouths to feed, and would seize any pretext—”

“Well, comrades!” cried Max softly, now appearing, “why star-gazing? the planets don’t distil kirschwasser. Come, let us go to Mere Cognette’s!”

“To Mere Cognette’s! To Mere Cognette’s!” they all cried.

The cry rang through the town like troops rushing; silence followed. The next day many asked, “Did you hear those frightful cries last night about one? I thought there was a fire.”

A supper worthy of La Cognette brightened the faces of twenty-two guests; the whole Order was present. At two, as they began to siroter, Max rose to speak:

“My dear fellows! the honor of your grand master was grossly attacked this morning after our memorable joke with Fario’s cart—attacked by a vile peddler, and what is more, a Spaniard (oh, Cabrera!); and I have resolved to make the scoundrel feel my vengeance—always, of course, within our rules. After reflecting, I have a trick worth execution—a famous trick that will drive him crazy. While avenging the insult, we shall feed the sacred animals of the Egyptians—little beasts unjustly persecuted. Thus good is the child of evil. I order you all, under pain of displeasing your humble grand master, to procure clandestinely, each, twenty rats, male or female. Collect your contingent within three days. Keep the rodents without food so they are ravenous. I will accept house-mice and field-mice as rats. Twenty-two times twenty gives four hundred; four hundred let loose in the old Capuchin church where Fario stores his grain will eat a not insignificant quantity! Be lively; Fario delivers most grain soon, and I am determined that Spaniard shall find a terrible deficit. I have not the merit of this invention,” Max added, seeing admiration; “render to Caesar that which is Caesar’s. My scheme reproduces Samson’s foxes; but Samson was an incendiary, no philanthropist; we, like Brahmins, protect a persecuted race. Mademoiselle Flore Brazier has set mouse-traps, and Kouski hunts field-mice. I have spoken.”

“I know,” said Goddet, “where to find an animal worth forty rats himself alone.”

“What’s that?”

“A squirrel.”

“I offer a little monkey,” said a younger member, “he’ll make himself drunk on wheat.”

“Bad!” exclaimed Max, “it would show who put the beasts there.”

“But we might each catch a pigeon some night,” said young Beaussier, “taking them from different farms; if we put them through a hole in the roof, they’ll attract thousands.”

“So, then, for the next week, Fario’s storehouse is the order of the night,” cried Max. “Recollect; people rise early in Saint-Paterne. Also, none of you go there without turning the soles of your list shoes backward. Knight Beaussier, the inventor of pigeons, is made director. I shall leave my imprint on the sacks of wheat. Gentlemen, you are appointed to the commissariat of the Army of Rats. If you find a watchman sleeping in the church, you must make him drunk—and cleverly—so he is far from the Rodents’ Orgy.”

“You don’t say anything about the Parisians?” Goddet asked.

“Oh!” exclaimed Max, “I want time to study them. Meantime, I offer my best shotgun—the one the Emperor gave me, a treasure from Versailles—to whoever finds a way to play the Bridaus a trick that will get them into difficulties with Madame and Monsieur Hochon, so those worthy people will send them off, or the Parisians will be forced to go of their own accord—without injuring the venerable ancestors of my two friends here, Baruch and Francois.”

“All right! I’ll think of it,” said Goddet, who coveted the gun.

“If the inventor of the trick doesn’t want the gun, he shall have my horse,” added Max.

After that night twenty brains were tortured to lay a plot against Agathe and her son, following Max’s programme. But only the devil or chance could help them succeed; the conditions made it well-nigh impossible.

The next morning Agathe and Joseph came down before the second breakfast at ten. In Hochon’s household first breakfast meant a cup of milk and a slice of bread and butter taken in bed or when rising. While waiting for Madame Hochon to finish her minute toilette, Joseph noticed Jean-Jacques Rouget planted squarely at his door across the street. He pointed him out; Agathe could hardly recognize her brother, so altered was he.

“That is your brother,” said Adolphine.

“What an idiot he looks like!” exclaimed Joseph.

Agathe clasped her hands and looked to heaven. “What a state they have driven him to! Good God! can that be a man only fifty-seven?”

She looked closely and saw Flore Brazier standing behind him, hair dressed, snowy shoulders and a dazzling bosom through a gauze neckerchief trimmed with lace; her grenadine dress had leg-of-mutton sleeves fastened at the wrists with bracelets. A gold chain rippled over her bosom as she leaned forward to give Jean-Jacques his black silk cap; the scene was evidently studied.

“Hey!” cried Joseph, “there’s a fine woman, and a rare one! She’s made, as they say, to paint. What flesh-tints! Oh, the lovely tones! what surface! what curves! Ah, those shoulders! She’s a magnificent caryatid. What a model she would have been for one of Titian’s Venuses!”

Adolphine and Madame Hochon thought him talking Greek; Agathe signed behind his back that she was used to such jargon.

“So you think a creature who is depriving you of your property handsome?” said Madame Hochon.

“That doesn’t prevent her from being a splendid model—just plump enough not to spoil the hips and contour—”

“My son, you are not in your studio,” said Agathe. “Adolphine is here.”

“Ah, true! I did wrong. But you must remember that since leaving Paris I’ve seen nothing but ugly women—”

“My dear godmother,” Agathe said hastily, “how shall I meet my brother if that creature is always with him?”

“Bah!” said Joseph. “I’ll go and see him myself. I don’t think him such an idiot now I find he has the sense to rejoice his eyes with a Titian’s Venus.”

“If he were not an idiot,” said Monsieur Hochon, who had come in, “he would have married long ago and had children; and then you would have no chance at the property. It is an ill wind that blows no good.”

“Your son’s idea is very good,” said Madame Hochon; “he ought to pay the first visit. He can make his uncle understand that if you call there he must be alone.”

“That will affront Mademoiselle Brazier,” said old Hochon. “No, no, madame; swallow the pill. If you can’t get the whole property, secure a small legacy.”

The Hochons were not clever enough to match Max. In the middle of breakfast Kouski brought a letter from Monsieur Rouget to his sister, Madame Bridau. Madame Hochon made her husband read it aloud:

My dear Sister,—I learn from strangers of your arrival in Issoudun. I can guess the reason which made you prefer Monsieur and Madame Hochon’s house to mine; but if you will come to see me you shall be received as you ought. I should certainly pay you the first visit if my health did not compel me to keep the house; for which I offer my affectionate regrets. I shall be delighted to see my nephew, whom I invite to dine with me tomorrow—young men are less sensitive than women about the company. It will please me if Messrs. Baruch Borniche and Francois Hochon will accompany him.

Your affectionate brother,

J.-J. Rouget.

“Say we are at breakfast, but Madame Bridau will send an answer presently, and the invitations are all accepted,” said Monsieur Hochon to the servant.

The old man put a finger to his lips for silence. When the street-door closed, Monsieur Hochon, little suspecting the intimacy between his grandsons and Max, threw one of his slyest looks at his wife and Agathe, remarking, “He is just as capable of writing that note as I am of giving away twenty-five louis; it is the soldier who corresponds with us!”

“What does that portend?” asked Madame Hochon. “Well, never mind; we will answer him. As for you, monsieur,” she added to Joseph, “you must dine there; but if—”

The old lady was stopped by a look from her husband. Knowing her affection for Agathe, old Hochon feared she might leave some legacy to her goddaughter if Agathe lost the Rouget property. Though fifteen years older, the miser hoped to inherit her fortune and eventually control their property. That hope was fixed. Madame Hochon knew threatening him with her will was the best way to get concessions. Monsieur Hochon now sided with his guests. An enormous fortune was at stake; with a sense of social justice he wished it to go to natural heirs rather than pillaged by outsiders. The sooner the matter was decided, the sooner he would rid himself of the guests. The struggle between interlopers and heirs had become a fact, and Monsieur Hochon’s keen intelligence, lulled by provincial monotony, was roused. Madame Hochon was pleasantly surprised to find such an able auxiliary on the Bridau side.

Towards midday the brains of Monsieur and Madame Hochon, Agathe, and Joseph—Joseph amazed at the old people’s scrupulous choice of words—produced the following answer, concocted for Max and Flore:

My dear Brother,—If I have stayed away from Issoudun, and kept up no intercourse with any one, not even with you, the fault lies not merely with the strange and false ideas my father conceived about me, but with the joys and sorrows of my life in Paris; for if God made me a happy wife, he has also deeply afflicted me as a mother. You are aware that my son, your nephew Philippe, lies under accusation of a capital offence for his devotion to the Emperor. Therefore you can hardly be surprised if a widow, compelled to take a humble situation in a lottery-office for a living, should come to seek consolation among those among whom she was born.

The profession adopted by the son who accompanies me is one that requires great talent, many sacrifices, and prolonged studies before any results can be obtained. Glory for an artist precedes fortune; is not that to say that Joseph, though he may bring honor to the family, will still be poor? Your sister, my dear Jean-Jacques, would have borne in silence the penalties of paternal injustice, but you will pardon a mother for reminding you that you have two nephews; one who carried the Emperor’s orders at Montereau and served in the Guard at Waterloo, now in prison for his devotion; the other, from his thirteenth year, has been impelled by natural gifts to enter a difficult though glorious career.

I thank you for your letter, my dear brother, with heartfelt warmth, for my own sake and Joseph’s, who will certainly accept your invitation. Illness excuses everything, and I shall therefore go to see you in your own house. A sister is always at home with a brother, whatever life he has adopted.

I embrace you tenderly.

Agathe Rouget

“There’s the matter started. Now, when you see him,” said Monsieur Hochon to Agathe, “you must speak plainly to him about his nephews.”

Gritte returned ten minutes later to report, as is provincial custom, all she had seen and heard.

“Since yesterday Madame has had the whole house cleaned up, which she left—”

“Whom do you mean by Madame?” asked old Hochon.

“That’s what they call the Rabouilleuse,” answered Gritte. “She left the salon and Monsieur Rouget’s part of the house in a pitiable state; but since yesterday the rooms have been made like before Monsieur Maxence moved in. You can see your face on the floors. La Vedie told me Kouski rode off at five and came back at nine with provisions. It’s going to be a grand dinner—a dinner fit for the archbishop of Bourges! There’s a fine bustle; Monsieur pokes into everything. He says, ‘I want to do honor to my nephew,’ and he is delighted to find his sister so amiable. Oh! she had on such a dress! Two diamonds in her ears—Vedie says three thousand francs apiece; such lace! rings and bracelets! you’d think she was a shrine; and a silk dress like an altar cloth. She had little black satin slippers and stockings marvels—flowers in silk and openwork—and a lovely little apron Vedie says cost more than two years’ wages.”

“Well done! We shall have to dress up,” laughed the artist.

“What do you think of all this, Monsieur Hochon?” said the old lady after Gritte left.

Madame Hochon made Agathe observe her husband, who sat with his head in his hands, elbows on chair-arms, plunged in thought.

“You have to do with a Maitre Bonin!” said the old man at last. “With your ideas, young man,” he added to Joseph, “you haven’t force enough to struggle with a practised scoundrel like Maxence Gilet. No matter what I say, you will commit some folly. But tell me everything you see, hear, and do to-night. Go, and God be with you! Try to get alone with your uncle. If, despite your genius, you can’t manage it, that in itself will throw light on their scheme. But if you do get a moment alone, out of earshot, damn it, pull the wool from his eyes about the situation those two have put him in, and plead your mother’s cause.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XII

At four o’clock, Joseph crossed the open space separating the Rouget house from the Hochon house,—an avenue of weak lindens, two hundred feet long and as wide as the rue Grande Narette. When the nephew arrived, Kouski, in polished boots, black trousers, white waistcoat, and black coat, announced him. The table was set in the large hall, and Joseph, who easily distinguished his uncle, went up to him, kissed him, and bowed to Flore and Max.

“We have not seen each other since I came into the world, my dear uncle,” said the painter gayly; “but better late than never.”

“You are very welcome, my friend,” said the old man, looking at his nephew in a dull way.

“Madame,” Joseph said to Flore with an artist’s vivacity, “this morning I was envying my uncle the pleasure he enjoys in being able to admire you every day.”

“Isn’t she beautiful?” said the old man, whose dim eyes began to shine.

“Beautiful enough to be the model of a great painter.”

“Nephew,” said Rouget, whose elbow Flore was nudging, “this is Monsieur Maxence Gilet; a man who served the Emperor, like your brother, in the Imperial Guard.”

Joseph rose and bowed.

“Your brother was in the dragoons, I believe,” said Maxence. “I was only a dust-trotter.”

“On foot or on horseback,” said Flore, “you both of you risked your skins.”

Joseph took note of Max as much as Max took note of Joseph. Max, who got his clothes from Paris, was dressed as the young dandies of that day dressed. Light-blue cloth trousers, very full plaits, covered his feet so only the toes and the spurs of his boots were seen. His waist was pinched by a white waistcoat with chased gold buttons, laced behind like a belt. The waistcoat, buttoned to the throat, showed off his broad chest, and a black satin stock obliged him to hold his head high, in soldierly fashion. A handsome gold chain hung from a waistcoat pocket, the outline of a flat watch barely seen. He was twisting a watch-key of the kind called a “criquet,” which Breguet had lately invented.

“The fellow is fine-looking,” thought Joseph, admiring with a painter’s eye the eager face, the air of strength, and the intellectual gray eyes Max had inherited from his father, the noble. “My uncle must be a fearful bore, and that handsome girl takes her compensations. It is a triangular household; I see that.”

At this instant, Baruch and Francois entered.

“Have you been to see the tower of Issoudun?” Flore asked Joseph. “No? then if you would like to take a little walk before dinner, which will not be served for an hour, we will show you the great curiosity of the town.”

“Gladly,” said the artist, quite incapable of seeing the slightest impropriety in so doing.

While Flore went to put on her bonnet, gloves, and cashmere shawl, Joseph suddenly jumped up, as if enchanted, to look at the pictures.

“Ah! you have pictures, indeed, uncle!” he said, examining the one that had caught his eye.

“Yes,” answered the old man. “They came to us from the Descoings, who bought them during the Revolution, when the convents and churches in Berry were dismantled.”

Joseph was not listening; he was lost in admiration of the pictures.

“Magnificent!” he cried. “Oh! what painting! that fellow didn’t spoil his canvas. Dear, dear! better and better, as it is at Nicolet’s—”

“There are seven or eight very large ones up in the garret, which were kept on account of the frames,” said Gilet.

“Let me see them!” cried the artist; and Max took him upstairs.

Joseph came down wildly enthusiastic. Max whispered a word to the Rabouilleuse, who took the old man into the embrasure of a window, where Joseph heard her say in a low voice, but still so that he could hear the words:—

“Your nephew is a painter; you don’t care for those pictures; be kind, and give them to him.”

“It seems,” said Jean-Jacques, leaning on Flore’s arm to reach the place where Joseph stood in ecstasy before an Albano, “—it seems that you are a painter—”

“Only a ‘rapin,’” said Joseph.

“What may that be?” asked Flore.

“A beginner,” replied Joseph.

“Well,” continued Jean-Jacques, “if these pictures can be of any use to you in your business, I give them to you,—but without the frames. Oh! the frames are gilt, and besides, they are very funny; I will put—”

“Well done, uncle!” cried Joseph, enchanted; “I’ll make you copies of the same dimensions, which you can put into the frames.”

“But that will take your time, and you will want canvas and colors,” said Flore. “You will have to spend money. Come, Pere Rouget, offer your nephew a hundred francs for each copy; here are twenty-seven pictures, and I think there are eleven very big ones in the garret which ought to cost double,—call the whole four thousand francs. Oh, yes,” she went on, turning to Joseph, “your uncle can well afford to pay you four thousand francs for making the copies, since he keeps the frames—but bless me! you’ll want frames; and they say frames cost more than pictures; there’s more gold on them. Answer, monsieur,” she continued, shaking the old man’s arm. “Hein? it isn’t dear; your nephew will take four thousand francs for new pictures in the place of the old ones. It is,” she whispered, “a very good way to give him four thousand francs; he doesn’t look to me very flush—”

“Well, nephew, I will pay you four thousand francs for the copies—”

“No, no!” said the honest Joseph; “four thousand francs and the pictures, that’s too much; the pictures, don’t you see, are valuable—”

“Accept, simpleton!” said Flore; “he is your uncle, you know.”

“Very good, I accept,” said Joseph, bewildered by the luck that had befallen him; for he had recognized a Perugino.

The result was that the artist beamed with satisfaction as he went out of the house with the Rabouilleuse on his arm, all of which helped Maxence’s plans immensely. Neither Flore, nor Rouget, nor Max, nor indeed anyone in Issoudun knew the value of the pictures, and the crafty Max thought he had bought Flore’s triumph for a song, as she paraded triumphantly before the astonished town, leaning on the arm of her master’s nephew, and evidently on the best of terms with him. People flocked to their doors to see the crab-girl’s triumph over the family. This astounding event made the sensation on which Max counted; so that when they all returned at five o’clock, nothing was talked of in every household but the cordial understanding between Max and Flore and the nephew of old Rouget. The incident of the pictures and the four thousand francs circulated already. The dinner, at which Lousteau, one of the court judges, and the Mayor of Issoudun were present, was splendid. It was one of those provincial dinners lasting five hours. The most exquisite wines enlivened the conversation. By nine o’clock, at dessert, the painter, seated opposite his uncle, and between Flore and Max, had fraternized with the soldier, and thought him the best fellow on earth. Joseph returned home at eleven o’clock somewhat tipsy. As to old Rouget, Kouski had carried him to his bed dead-drunk; he had eaten as though an actor from foreign parts, and had soaked up the wine like the sands of the desert.

“Well,” said Max when he was alone with Flore, “isn’t this better than making faces at them? The Bridaus are well received, they get small presents, and are smothered with attentions, and the end of it is they will sing our praises; they will go away satisfied and leave us in peace. To-morrow morning you and I and Kouski will take down all those pictures and send them over to the painter, so that he shall see them when he wakes up. We will put the frames in the garret, and cover the walls with one of those varnished papers which represent scenes from Telemachus, such as I have seen at Monsieur Mouilleron’s.”

“Oh, that will be much prettier!” said Flore.

On the morrow, Joseph did not wake till midday. From his bed he saw the pictures, which had been brought in while he was asleep, leaning one against another on the opposite wall. While he examined them anew, recognizing each masterpiece, studying the manner of each painter, and searching for the signature, his mother had gone to see and thank her brother, urged thereto by old Hochon, who, having heard of the follies the painter had committed the night before, almost despaired of the Bridau cause.

“Your adversaries have the cunning of foxes,” he said to Agathe. “In all my days I never saw a man carry things with such a high hand as that soldier; they say war educates young men! Joseph has let himself be fooled. They have shut his mouth with wine, and those miserable pictures, and four thousand francs! Your artist hasn’t cost Maxence much!”

The long-headed old man instructed Madame Bridau carefully as to the line of conduct she ought to pursue,—advising her to enter into Maxence’s ideas and cajole Flore, so as to set up a sort of intimacy with her, and thus obtain a few moments’ interview with Jean-Jacques alone. Madame Bridau was warmly received by her brother, to whom Flore had taught his lesson. The old man was in bed, quite ill from the excesses of the night before. As Agathe, under the circumstances, could scarcely begin at once to speak of family matters, Max thought it proper and magnanimous to leave the brother and sister alone together. The calculation was a good one. Poor Agathe found her brother so ill that she would not deprive him of Madame Brazier’s care.

“Besides,” she said to the old bachelor, “I wish to know a person to whom I am grateful for the happiness of my brother.”

These words gave evident pleasure to the old man, who rang for Madame Flore. Flore, as we may well believe, was not far off. The female antagonists bowed to each other. The Rabouilleuse showed the most servile attentions and the utmost tenderness to her master; fancied his head was too low, beat up the pillows, and took care of him like a bride of yesterday. The poor creature received it with a rush of feeling.

“We owe you much gratitude, mademoiselle,” said Agathe, “for the proofs of attachment you have so long given to my brother, and for the way in which you watch over his happiness.”

“That is true, my dear Agathe,” said the old man; “she has taught me what happiness is; she is a woman of excellent qualities.”

“And therefore, my dear brother, you ought to have recompensed Mademoiselle by making her your wife. Yes! I am too sincere in my religion not to wish to see you obey the precepts of the church. You would each be more tranquil in mind if you were not at variance with morality and the laws. I have come here, dear brother, to ask for help in my affliction; but do not suppose that we wish to make any remonstrance as to the manner in which you may dispose of your property—”

“Madame,” said Flore, “we know how unjust your father was to you. Monsieur, here, can tell you,” she went on, looking fixedly at her victim, “that the only quarrels we have ever had were about you. I have always told him that he owes you part of the fortune he received from his father, and your father, my benefactor,—for he was my benefactor,” she added in a tearful voice; “I shall ever remember him! But your brother, madame, has listened to reason—”

“Yes,” said the old man, “when I make my will you shall not be forgotten.”

“Don’t talk of these things, my dear brother; you do not yet know my nature.”

After such a beginning, it is easy to imagine how the visit went on. Rouget invited his sister to dinner on the next day but one.

We may here mention that during these three days the Knights of Idleness captured an immense quantity of rats and mice, which were kept half-famished until they were let loose in the grain one fine night, to the number of four hundred and thirty-six, of which some were breeding mothers. Not content with providing Fario’s store-house with these boarders, the Knights made holes in the roof of the old church and put in a dozen pigeons, taken from as many different farms. These four-footed and feathered creatures held high revels,—all the more securely because the watchman was enticed away by a fellow who kept him drunk from morning till night, so that he took no care of his master’s property.

Madame Bridau believed, contrary to old Hochon, that her brother had as yet made no will; she intended asking him what were his intentions respecting Mademoiselle Brazier, as soon as she could take a walk with him alone,—a hope which Flore and Maxence were always holding out to her, and, of course, always disappointing.

Meantime the Knights were searching for a way to put the Parisians to flight, and finding none that were not impracticable follies.

At the end of a week—half the time the Parisians were to stay in Issoudun—the Bridaus were no farther advanced in their object than when they came.

“Your lawyer does not understand the provinces,” said old Hochon to Madame Bridau. “What you have come to do can’t be done in two weeks, nor in two years; you ought never to leave your brother, but live here and try to give him some ideas of religion. You cannot countermine the fortifications of Flore and Maxence without getting a priest to sap them. That is my advice, and it is high time to set about it.”

“You certainly have very singular ideas about the clergy,” said Madame Hochon to her husband.

“Bah!” exclaimed the old man, “that’s just like you pious women.”

“God would never bless an enterprise undertaken in a sacrilegious spirit,” said Madame Bridau. “Use religion for such a purpose! Why, we should be more criminal than Flore.”

This conversation took place at breakfast,—Francois and Baruch listening with all their ears.

“Sacrilege!” exclaimed old Hochon. “If some good abbe, keen as I have known many of them to be, knew what a dilemma you are in, he would not think it sacrilege to bring your brother’s lost soul back to God, and call him to repentance for his sins, by forcing him to send away the woman who causes the scandal (with a proper provision, of course), and showing him how to set his conscience at rest by giving a few thousand francs a year to the seminary of the archbishop and leaving his property to the rightful heirs.”

The passive obedience which the old miser had always exacted from his children, and now from his grandchildren (who were under his guardianship and for whom he was amassing a small fortune, doing for them, he said, just as he would for himself), prevented Baruch and Francois from showing signs of surprise or disapproval; but they exchanged significant glances expressing how dangerous and fatal such a scheme would be to Max’s interest.

“The fact is, madame,” said Baruch, “that if you want to secure your brother’s property, the only sure and true way will be to stay in Issoudun for the necessary length of time—”

“Mother,” said Joseph hastily, “you had better write to Desroches about all this. As for me, I ask nothing more than what my uncle has already given me.”

After fully recognizing the great value of his thirty-nine pictures, Joseph had carefully unnailed the canvases and fastened paper over them, gumming it at the edges with ordinary glue; he then laid them one above another in an enormous wooden box, which he sent to Desroches by the carrier’s waggon, proposing to write him a letter about it by post. The precious freight had been sent off the night before.

“You are satisfied with a pretty poor bargain,” said Monsieur Hochon.

“I can easily get a hundred and fifty thousand francs for those pictures,” replied Joseph.

“Painter’s nonsense!” exclaimed old Hochon, giving Joseph a peculiar look.

“Mother,” said Joseph, “I am going to write to Desroches and explain to him the state of things here. If he advises you to remain, you had better do so. As for your situation, we can always find you another like it.”

“My dear Joseph,” said Madame Hochon, following him as he left the table, “I don’t know anything about your uncle’s pictures, but they ought to be good, judging by the places from which they came. If they are worth only forty thousand francs,—a thousand francs apiece,—tell no one. Though my grandsons are discreet and well-behaved, they might, without intending harm, speak of this windfall; it would be known all over Issoudun; and it is very important that our adversaries should not suspect it. You behave like a child!”

In fact, before evening many persons in Issoudun, including Max, were informed of this estimate, which had the immediate effect of causing a search for all the old paintings which no one had ever cared for, and the appearance of many execrable daubs. Max repented having driven the old man into giving away the pictures, and the rage he felt against the heirs after hearing from Baruch old Hochon’s ecclesiastical scheme, was increased by what he termed his own stupidity. The influence of religion upon such a feeble creature as Rouget was the one thing to fear. The news brought by his two comrades decided Maxence Gilet to turn all Rouget’s investments into money, and to borrow upon his landed property, so as to buy into the Funds as soon as possible; but he considered it even more important to get rid of the Parisians at once. The genius of the Mascarilles and Scapins out together would hardly have solved the latter problem easily.

Flore, acting by Max’s advice, pretended that Monsieur was too feeble to take walks, and that he ought, at his age, to have a carriage. This pretext grew out of the necessity of not exciting inquiry when they went to Bourges, Vierzon, Chateauroux, Vatan, and all the other places where the project of withdrawing investments obliged Max and Flore to betake themselves with Rouget. At the close of the week, all Issoudun was amazed to learn that the old man had gone to Bourges to buy a carriage,—a step which the Knights of Idleness regarded as favorable to the Rabouilleuse. Flore and Max selected a hideous “berlingot,” with cracked leather curtains and windows without glass, aged twenty-two years and nine campaigns, sold on the decease of a colonel, the friend of grand-marshal Bertrand, who, during the absence of that faithful companion of the Emperor, was left in charge of the affairs of Berry. This “berlingot,” painted bright green, was somewhat like a caleche, though shafts had taken the place of a pole, so that it could be driven with one horse. It belonged to a class of carriages brought into vogue by diminished fortunes, which at that time bore the candid name of “demi-fortune”; at its first introduction it was called a “seringue.” The cloth lining of this demi-fortune, sold under the name of caleche, was moth-eaten; its gimps looked like the chevrons of an old Invalide; its rusty joints squeaked,—but it only cost four hundred and fifty francs; and Max bought a good stout mare, trained to harness, from an officer of a regiment then stationed at Bourges. He had the carriage repainted a dark brown, and bought a tolerable harness at a bargain. The whole town of Issoudun was shaken to its centre in expectation of Pere Rouget’s equipage; and on the occasion of its first appearance, every household was on its door-step and curious faces were at all the windows.

The second time the old bachelor went out he drove to Bourges, where, to escape the trouble of attending personally to the business, or, if you prefer it, being ordered to do so by Flore, he went before a notary and signed a power of attorney in favor of Maxence Gilet, enabling him to make all the transfers enumerated in the document. Flore reserved to herself the business of making Monsieur sell out the investments in Issoudun and its immediate neighborhood. The principal notary in Bourges was requested by Rouget to get him a loan of one hundred and forty thousand francs on his landed estate. Nothing was known at Issoudun of these proceedings, which were secretly and cleverly carried out. Maxence, who was a good rider, went with his own horse to Bourges and back between five in the morning and five in the afternoon. Flore never left the old bachelor. Rouget consented without objection to the action Flore dictated to him; but he insisted that the investment in the Funds, producing fifty thousand francs a year, should stand in Flore’s name as holding a life-interest only, and in his as owner of the principal. The tenacity the old man displayed in the domestic disputes which this idea created caused Max a good deal of anxiety; he thought he could see the result of reflections inspired by the sight of the natural heirs.

Amid all these movements, which Max concealed from the knowledge of everyone, he forgot the Spaniard and his granary. Fario came back to Issoudun to deliver his corn, after various trips and manoeuvres undertaken to raise the price of cereals. The morning after his arrival he noticed that the roof of the church of the Capuchins was black with pigeons. He cursed himself for having neglected to examine its condition, and hurried over to look into his storehouse, where he found half his grain devoured. Thousands of mice-marks and rat-marks scattered about showed a second cause of ruin. The church was a Noah’s-ark. But anger turned the Spaniard white as a bit of cambric when, trying to estimate the extent of the destruction and his consequent losses, he noticed that the grain at the bottom of the heap, near the floor, was sprouting from the effects of water, which Max had managed to introduce by means of tin tubes into the very centre of the pile of wheat. The pigeons and the rats could be explained by animal instinct; but the hand of man was plainly visible in this last sign of malignity.

Fario sat down on the steps of a chapel altar, holding his head between his hands. After half an hour of Spanish reflections, he spied the squirrel, which Goddet could not refrain from giving him as a guest, playing with its tail upon a cross-beam, on the middle of which rested one of the uprights that supported the roof. The Spaniard rose and turned to his watchman with a face that was as calm and cold as an Arab’s. He made no complaint, but went home, hired laborers to gather into sacks what remained of the sound grain, and to spread in the sun all that was moist, so as to save as much as possible; then, after estimating that his losses amounted to about three fifths, he attended to filling his orders. But his previous manipulations of the market had raised the price of cereals, and he lost on the three fifths he was obliged to buy to fill his orders; so that his losses amounted really to more than half. The Spaniard, who had no enemies, at once attributed this revenge to Gilet. He was convinced that Maxence and some others were the authors of all the nocturnal mischief, and had in all probability carried his cart up the embankment of the tower, and now intended to amuse themselves by ruining him. It was a matter to him of over three thousand francs,—very nearly the whole capital he had scraped together since the peace. Driven by the desire for vengeance, the man now displayed the cunning and stealthy persistence of a detective to whom a large reward is offered. Hiding at night in different parts of Issoudun, he soon acquired proof of the proceedings of the Knights of Idleness; he saw them all, counted them, watched their rendezvous, and knew of their suppers at Mere Cognette’s; after that he lay in wait to witness one of their deeds, and thus became well informed as to their nocturnal habits.

In spite of Max’s journeys and preoccupations, he had no intention of neglecting his nightly employments,—first, because he did not wish his comrades to suspect the secret of his operations with Pere Rouget’s property; and secondly, to keep the Knights well in hand. They were therefore convened for the preparation of a prank which might deserve to be talked of for years to come. Poisoned meat was to be thrown on a given night to every watch-dog in the town and in the environs. Fario overheard them congratulating each other, as they came out from a supper at the Cognettes’, on the probable success of the performance, and laughing over the general mourning that would follow this novel massacre of the innocents,—revelling, moreover, in the apprehensions it would excite as to the sinister object of depriving all the households of their guardian watch-dogs.

“It will make people forget Fario’s cart,” said Goddet.

Fario did not need that speech to confirm his suspicions; besides, his mind was already made up.

After three weeks’ stay in Issoudun, Agathe was convinced, and so was Madame Hochon, of the truth of the old miser’s observation, that it would take years to destroy the influence which Max and the Rabouilleuse had acquired over her brother. She had made no progress in Jean-Jacques’s confidence, and she was never left alone with him. On the other hand, Mademoiselle Brazier triumphed openly over the heirs by taking Agathe to drive in the caleche, sitting beside her on the back seat, while Monsieur Rouget and his nephew occupied the front. Mother and son impatiently awaited an answer to the confidential letter they had written to Desroches. The day before the night on which the dogs were to be poisoned, Joseph, who was nearly bored to death in Issoudun, received two letters: the first from the great painter Schinner,—whose age allowed him a closer intimacy than Joseph could have with Gros, their master,—and the second from Desroches.

Here is the first, postmarked Beaumont-sur-Oise:—

  My dear Joseph,—I have just finished the principal
  panel-paintings at the chateau de Presles for the Comte de Serizy.
  I have left all the mouldings and the decorative painting; and I
  have recommended you so strongly to the count, and also to Gridot
  the architect, that you have nothing to do but pick up your
  brushes and come at once. Prices are arranged to please you. I am
  off to Italy with my wife; so you can have Mistigris to help you
  along. The young scamp has talent, and I put him at your disposal.
  He is twittering like a sparrow at the very idea of amusing
  himself at the chateau de Presles.

  Adieu, my dear Joseph; if I am still absent, and should send
  nothing to next year’s Salon, you must take my place. Yes, dear
  Jojo, I know your picture is a masterpiece, but a masterpiece
  which will rouse a hue and cry about romanticism; you are doomed
  to lead the life of a devil in holy water. Adieu.

  Thy friend,

  Schinner


Here follows the letter of Desroches:—

  My dear Joseph,—Your Monsieur Hochon strikes me as an old man
  full of common-sense, and you give me a high idea of his methods;
  he is perfectly right. My advice, since you ask it, is that your
  mother should remain at Issoudun with Madame Hochon, paying a
  small board,—say four hundred francs a year,—to reimburse her
  hosts for what she eats. Madame Bridau ought, in my opinion, to
  follow Monsieur Hochon’s advice in everything; for your excellent
  mother will have many scruples in dealing with persons who have no
  scruple at all, and whose behavior to her is a master-stroke of
  policy. That Maxence, you are right enough, is dangerous. He is
  another Philippe, but of a different calibre. The scoundrel makes
  his vices serve his fortunes, and gets his amusement gratis;
  whereas your brother’s follies are never useful to him. All that
  you say alarms me, but I could do no good by going to Issoudun.
  Monsieur Hochon, acting behind your mother, will be more useful to
  you than I. As for you, you had better come back here; you are
  good for nothing in a matter which requires continual attention,
  careful observation, servile civilities, discretion in speech, and
  a dissimulation of manner and gesture which is wholly against the
  grain of artists.

  If they have told you no will has been made, you may be quite sure
  they have possessed one for a long time. But wills can be revoked,
  and as long as your fool of an uncle lives he is no doubt
  susceptible of being worked upon by remorse and religion. Your
  inheritance will be the result of a combat between the Church and
  the Rabouilleuse. There will inevitably come a time when that
  woman will lose her grip on the old man, and religion will be
  all-powerful. So long as your uncle makes no gift of the property
  during his lifetime, and does not change the nature of his estate,
  all may come right whenever religion gets the upper hand. For this
  reason, you must beg Monsieur Hochon to keep an eye, as well as he
  can, on the condition of your uncle’s property. It is necessary to
  know if the real estate is mortgaged, and if so, where and in
  whose name the proceeds are invested. It is so easy to terrify an
  old man with fears about his life, in case you find him despoiling
  his own property for the sake of these interlopers, that almost
  any heir with a little adroitness could stop the spoliation at its
  outset. But how should your mother, with her ignorance of the
  world, her disinterestedness, and her religious ideas, know how to
  manage such an affair? However, I am not able to throw any light
  on the matter. All that you have done so far has probably given
  the alarm, and your adversaries may already have secured
  themselves—

“That is what I call an opinion in good shape,” exclaimed Monsieur Hochon, proud of being himself appreciated by a Parisian lawyer.

“Oh! Desroches is a famous fellow,” answered Joseph.

“It would be well to read that letter to the two women,” said the old man.

“There it is,” said Joseph, giving it to him; “as to me, I want to be off to-morrow; and I am now going to say good-by to my uncle.”

“Ah!” said Monsieur Hochon, “I see that Monsieur Desroches tells you in a postscript to burn the letter.”

“You can burn it after showing it to my mother,” said the painter.

Joseph dressed, crossed the little square, and called on his uncle, who was just finishing breakfast. Max and Flore were at table.

“Don’t disturb yourself, my dear uncle; I have only come to say good-by.”

“You are going?” said Max, exchanging glances with Flore.

“Yes; I have some work to do at the chateau of Monsieur de Serizy, and I am all the more glad of it because his arm is long enough to do a service to my poor brother in the Chamber of Peers.”

“Well, well, go and work”; said old Rouget, with a silly air. Joseph thought him extraordinarily changed within a few days. “Men must work—I am sorry you are going.”

“Oh! my mother will be here some time longer,” remarked Joseph.

Max made a movement with his lips which the Rabouilleuse observed, and which signified: “They are going to try the plan Baruch warned me of.”

“I am very glad I came,” said Joseph, “for I have had the pleasure of making your acquaintance and you have enriched my studio—”

“Yes,” said Flore, “instead of enlightening your uncle on the value of his pictures, which is now estimated at over one hundred thousand francs, you have packed them off in a hurry to Paris. Poor dear man! he is no better than a baby! We have just been told of a little treasure at Bourges,—what did they call it? a Poussin,—which was in the choir of the cathedral before the Revolution and is now worth, all by itself, thirty thousand francs.”

“That was not right of you, my nephew,” said Jean-Jacques, at a sign from Max, which Joseph could not see.

“Come now, frankly,” said the soldier, laughing, “on your honor, what should you say those pictures were worth? You’ve made an easy haul out of your uncle! and right enough, too,—uncles are made to be pillaged. Nature deprived me of uncles, but damn it, if I’d had any I should have shown them no mercy.”

“Did you know, monsieur,” said Flore to Rouget, “what your pictures were worth? How much did you say, Monsieur Joseph?”

“Well,” answered the painter, who had grown as red as a beetroot,—“the pictures are certainly worth something.”

“They say you estimated them to Monsieur Hochon at one hundred and fifty thousand francs,” said Flore; “is that true?”

“Yes,” said the painter, with childlike honesty.

“And did you intend,” said Flore to the old man, “to give a hundred and fifty thousand francs to your nephew?”

“Never, never!” cried Jean-Jacques, on whom Flore had fixed her eye.

“There is one way to settle all this,” said the painter, “and that is to return them to you, uncle.”

“No, no, keep them,” said the old man.

“I shall send them back to you,” said Joseph, wounded by the offensive silence of Max and Flore. “There is something in my brushes which will make my fortune, without owing anything to any one, even an uncle. My respects to you, mademoiselle; good-day, monsieur—”

And Joseph crossed the square in a state of irritation which artists can imagine. The entire Hochon family were in the salon. When they saw Joseph gesticulating and talking to himself, they asked him what was the matter. The painter, who was as open as the day, related before Baruch and Francois the scene that had just taken place; and which, two hours later, thanks to the two young men, was the talk of the whole town, embroidered with various circumstances that were more or less ridiculous. Some persons insisted that the painter was maltreated by Max; others that he had misbehaved to Flore, and that Max had turned him out of doors.

“What a child your son is!” said Hochon to Madame Bridau; “the booby is the dupe of a scene which they have been keeping back for the last day of his visit. Max and the Rabouilleuse have known the value of those pictures for the last two weeks,—ever since he had the folly to tell it before my grandsons, who never rested till they had blurted it out to all the world. Your artist had better have taken himself off without taking leave.”

“My son has done right to return the pictures if they are really so valuable,” said Agathe.

“If they are worth, as he says, two hundred thousand francs,” said old Hochon, “it was folly to put himself in the way of being obliged to return them. You might have had that, at least, out of the property; whereas, as things are going now, you won’t get anything. And this scene with Joseph is almost a reason why your brother should refuse to see you again.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XIII

Between midnight and one o’clock, the Knights of Idleness began their
gratuitous distribution of comestibles to the dogs of the town. This
memorable expedition was not over till three in the morning, the hour at
which these reprobates went to sup at Cognette’s. At half-past four, in
the early dawn, they crept home. Just as Max turned the corner of
the rue l’Avenier into the Grande rue, Fario, who stood ambushed in a
recess, struck a knife at his heart, drew out the blade, and escaped
by the moat towards Vilatte, wiping the blade of his knife on his
handkerchief. The Spaniard washed the handkerchief in the Riviere
forcee, and returned quietly to his lodgings at Saint-Paterne, where
he got in by a window he had left open, and went to bed: later, he was
awakened by his new watchman, who found him fast asleep.

As he fell, Max uttered a fearful cry which no one could mistake.
Lousteau-Prangin, son of a judge, a distant relation to the family of
the sub-delegate, and young Goddet, who lived at the lower end of the
Grande rue, ran at full speed up the street, calling to each other,--

“They are killing Max! Help! help!”

But not a dog barked; and all the town, accustomed to the false alarms
of these nightly prowlers, stayed quietly in their beds. When his
two comrades reached him, Max had fainted. It was necessary to rouse
Monsieur Goddet, the surgeon. Max had recognized Fario; but when he came
to his senses, with several persons about him, and felt that his wound
was not mortal, it suddenly occurred to him to make capital out of the
attack, and he said, in a faint voice,--

“I think I recognized that cursed painter!”

Thereupon Lousteau-Prangin ran off to his father, the judge. Max was
carried home by Cognette, young Goddet, and two other persons. Mere
Cognette and Monsieur Goddet walked beside the stretcher. Those who
carried the wounded man naturally looked across at Monsieur Hochon’s
door while waiting for Kouski to let them in, and saw Monsieur Hochon’s
servant sweeping the steps. At the old miser’s, as everywhere else in
the provinces, the household was early astir. The few words uttered by
Max had roused the suspicions of Monsieur Goddet, and he called to the
woman,--

“Gritte, is Monsieur Joseph Bridau in bed?”

“Bless me!” she said, “he went out at half-past four. I don’t know what
ailed him; he walked up and down his room all night.”

This simple answer drew forth such exclamations of horror that the
woman came over, curious to know what they were carrying to old Rouget’s
house.

“A precious fellow he is, that painter of yours!” they said to her.
And the procession entered the house, leaving Gritte open-mouthed
with amazement at the sight of Max in his bloody shirt, stretched
half-fainting on a mattress.

Artists will readily guess what ailed Joseph, and kept him restless all
night. He imagined the tale the bourgeoisie of Issoudun would tell of
him. They would say he had fleeced his uncle; that he was everything but
what he had tried to be,--a loyal fellow and an honest artist! Ah!
he would have given his great picture to have flown like a swallow to
Paris, and thrown his uncle’s paintings at Max’s nose. To be the one
robbed, and to be thought the robber!--what irony! So at the earliest
dawn, he had started for the poplar avenue which led to Tivoli, to give
free course to his agitation.

While the innocent fellow was vowing, by way of consolation, never
to return to Issoudun, Max was preparing a horrible outrage for
his sensitive spirit. When Monsieur Goddet had probed the wound and
discovered that the knife, turned aside by a little pocket-book, had
happily spared Max’s life (though making a serious wound), he did as all
doctors, and particularly country surgeons, do; he paved the way for his
own credit by “not answering for the patient’s life”; and then, after
dressing the soldier’s wound, and stating the verdict of science to the
Rabouilleuse, Jean-Jacques Rouget, Kouski, and the Vedie, he left the
house. The Rabouilleuse came in tears to her dear Max, while Kouski and
the Vedie told the assembled crowd that the captain was in a fair way
to die. The news brought nearly two hundred persons in groups about the
place Saint-Jean and the two Narettes.

“I sha’n’t be a month in bed; and I know who struck the blow,” whispered
Max to Flore. “But we’ll profit by it to get rid of the Parisians.
I have said I thought I recognized the painter; so pretend that I am
expected to die, and try to have Joseph Bridau arrested. Let him taste
a prison for a couple of days, and I know well enough the mother will be
off in a jiffy for Paris when she gets him out. And then we needn’t fear
the priests they talk of setting on the old fool.”

When Flore Brazier came downstairs, she found the assembled crowd quite
prepared to take the impression she meant to give them. She went out
with tears in her eyes, and related, sobbing, how the painter, “who had
just the face for that sort of thing,” had been angry with Max the night
before about some pictures he had “wormed out” of Pere Rouget.

“That brigand--for you’ve only got to look at him to see what he
is--thinks that if Max were dead, his uncle would leave him his fortune;
as if,” she cried, “a brother were not more to him than a nephew! Max is
Doctor Rouget’s son. The old one told me so before he died!”

“Ah! he meant to do the deed just before he left Issoudun; he chose
his time, for he was going away to-day,” said one of the Knights of
Idleness.

“Max hasn’t an enemy in Issoudun,” said another.

“Besides, Max recognized the painter,” said the Rabouilleuse.

“Where’s that cursed Parisian? Let us find him!” they all cried.

“Find him?” was the answer, “why, he left Monsieur Hochon’s at
daybreak.”

A Knight of Idleness ran off at once to Monsieur Mouilleron. The crowd
increased; and the tumult became threatening. Excited groups filled up
the whole of the Grande-Narette. Others stationed themselves before the
church of Saint-Jean. An assemblage gathered at the porte Vilatte, which
is at the farther end of the Petite-Narette. Monsieur Lousteau-Prangin
and Monsieur Mouilleron, the commissary of police, the lieutenant of
gendarmes, and two of his men, had some difficulty in reaching the place
Saint-Jean through two hedges of people, whose cries and exclamations
could and did prejudice them against the Parisian; who was, needless to say,
unjustly accused, although, it is true, circumstances told against him.

After a conference between Max and the magistrates, Monsieur Mouilleron
sent the commissary of police and a sergeant with one gendarme to
examine what, in the language of the ministry of the interior, is
called “the theatre of the crime.” Then Messieurs Mouilleron and
Lousteau-Prangin, accompanied by the lieutenant of gendarmes crossed
over to the Hochon house, which was now guarded by two gendarmes in the
garden and two at the front door. The crowd was still increasing. The
whole town was surging in the Grande rue.

Gritte had rushed terrified to her master, crying out: “Monsieur, we
shall be pillaged! the town is in revolt; Monsieur Maxence Gilet has
been assassinated; he is dying! and they say it is Monsieur Joseph who
has done it!”

Monsieur Hochon dressed quickly, and came downstairs; but seeing the
angry populace, he hastily retreated within the house, and bolted the
door. On questioning Gritte, he learned that his guest had left the
house at daybreak, after walking the floor all night in great agitation,
and had not yet come in. Much alarmed, he went to find Madame Hochon,
who was already awakened by the noise, and to whom he told the frightful
news which, true or false, was causing almost a riot in Issoudun.

“He is innocent, of course,” said Madame Hochon.

“Before his innocence can be proved, the crowd may get in here and
pillage us,” said Monsieur Hochon, livid with fear, for he had gold in
his cellar.

“Where is Agathe?”

“Sound asleep.”

“Ah! so much the better,” said Madame Hochon. “I wish she may sleep on
till the matter is cleared up. Such a shock might kill the poor child.”

But Agathe woke up and came down half-dressed; for the evasive answers
of Gritte, whom she questioned, had disturbed both her head and heart.
She found Madame Hochon, looking very pale, with her eyes full of tears,
at one of the windows of the salon beside her husband.

“Courage, my child. God sends us our afflictions,” said the old lady.
“Joseph is accused--”

“Of what?”

“Of a bad action which he could never have committed,” answered Madame
Hochon.

Hearing the words, and seeing the lieutenant of gendarmes, who at this
moment entered the room accompanied by the two gentlemen, Agathe fainted
away.

“There now!” said Monsieur Hochon to his wife and Gritte, “carry off
Madame Bridau; women are only in the way at these times. Take her to her
room and stay there, both of you. Sit down, gentlemen,” continued the
old man. “The mistake to which we owe your visit will soon, I hope, be
cleared up.”

“Even if it should be a mistake,” said Monsieur Mouilleron, “the
excitement of the crowd is so great, and their minds are so exasperated,
that I fear for the safety of the accused. I should like to get him
arrested, and that might satisfy these people.”

“Who would ever have believed that Monsieur Maxence Gilet had inspired
so much affection in this town?” asked Lousteau-Prangin.

“One of my men says there’s a crowd of twelve hundred more just coming
in from the faubourg de Rome,” said the lieutenant of gendarmes, “and
they are threatening death to the assassin.”

“Where is your guest?” said Monsieur Mouilleron to Monsieur Hochon.

“He has gone to walk in the country, I believe.”

“Call Gritte,” said the judge gravely. “I was in hopes he had not left
the house. You are aware that the crime was committed not far from here,
at daybreak.”

While Monsieur Hochon went to find Gritte, the three functionaries
looked at each other significantly.

“I never liked that painter’s face,” said the lieutenant to Monsieur
Mouilleron.

“My good woman,” said the judge to Gritte, when she appeared, “they say
you saw Monsieur Joseph Bridau leave the house this morning?”

“Yes, monsieur,” she answered, trembling like a leaf.

“At what hour?”

“Just as I was getting up: he walked about his room all night, and was
dressed when I came downstairs.”

“Was it daylight?”

“Barely.”

“Did he seem excited?”

“Yes, he was all of a twitter.”

“Send one of your men for my clerk,” said Lousteau-Prangin to the
lieutenant, “and tell him to bring warrants with him--”

“Good God! don’t be in such a hurry,” cried Monsieur Hochon. “The
young man’s agitation may have been caused by something besides the
premeditation of this crime. He meant to return to Paris to-day, to
attend to a matter in which Gilet and Mademoiselle Brazier had doubted
his honor.”

“Yes, the affair of the pictures,” said Monsieur Mouilleron. “Those
pictures caused a very hot quarrel between them yesterday, and it is a
word and a blow with artists, they tell me.”

“Who is there in Issoudun who had any object in killing Gilet?” said
Lousteau. “No one,--neither a jealous husband nor anybody else; for the
fellow has never harmed a soul.”

“But what was Monsieur Gilet doing in the streets at four in the
morning?” remarked Monsieur Hochon.

“Now, Monsieur Hochon, you must allow us to manage this affair in our
own way,” answered Mouilleron; “you don’t know all: Gilet recognized
your painter.”

At this instant a clamor was heard from the other end of the town,
growing louder and louder, like the roll of thunder, as it followed the
course of the Grande-Narette.

“Here he is! here he is!--he’s arrested!”

These words rose distinctly on the ear above the hoarse roar of the
populace. Poor Joseph, returning quietly past the mill at Landrole
intending to get home in time for breakfast, was spied by the various
groups of people, as soon as he reached the place Misere. Happily for
him, a couple of gendarmes arrived on a run in time to snatch him from
the inhabitants of the faubourg de Rome, who had already pinioned him by
the arms and were threatening him with death.

“Give way! give way!” cried the gendarmes, calling to some of their
comrades to help them, and putting themselves one before and the other
behind Bridau.

“You see, monsieur,” said the one who held the painter, “it concerns
our skin as well as yours at this moment. Innocent or guilty, we must
protect you against the tumult raised by the murder of Captain Gilet.
And the crowd is not satisfied with suspecting you; they declare, hard
as iron, that you are the murderer. Monsieur Gilet is adored by all the
people, who--look at them!--want to take justice into their own
hands. Ah! didn’t we see them, in 1830, dusting the jackets of the
tax-gatherers? whose life isn’t a bed of roses, anyway!”

Joseph Bridau grew pale as death, and collected all his strength to walk
onward.

“After all,” he said, “I am innocent. Go on!”

Poor artist! he was forced to bear his cross. Amid the hooting and
insults and threats from the mob, he made the dreadful transit from the
place Misere to the place Saint-Jean. The gendarmes were obliged to draw
their sabres on the furious mob, which pelted them with stones. One of
the officers was wounded, and Joseph received several of the missiles on
his legs, and shoulders, and hat.

“Here we are!” said one of the gendarmes, as they entered Monsieur
Hochon’s hall, “and not without difficulty, lieutenant.”

“We must now manage to disperse the crowd; and I see but one way,
gentlemen,” said the lieutenant to the magistrates. “We must take
Monsieur Bridau to the Palais accompanied by all of you; I and my
gendarmes will make a circle round you. One can’t answer for anything in
presence of a furious crowd of six thousand--”

“You are right,” said Monsieur Hochon, who was trembling all the while
for his gold.

“If that’s your only way to protect innocence in Issoudun,” said Joseph,
“I congratulate you. I came near being stoned--”

“Do you wish your friend’s house to be taken by assault and pillaged?”
 asked the lieutenant. “Could we beat back with our sabres a crowd
of people who are pushed from behind by an angry populace that knows
nothing of the forms of justice?”

“That will do, gentlemen, let us go; we can come to explanations later,”
 said Joseph, who had recovered his self-possession.

“Give way, friends!” said the lieutenant to the crowd; “_He_ is
arrested, and we are taking him to the Palais.”

“Respect the law, friends!” said Monsieur Mouilleron.

“Wouldn’t you prefer to see him guillotined?” said one of the gendarmes
to an angry group.

“Yes, yes, they shall guillotine him!” shouted one madman.

“They are going to guillotine him!” cried the women.

By the time they reached the end of the Grande-Narette the crowd were
shouting: “They are taking him to the guillotine!” “They found the knife
upon him!” “That’s what Parisians are!” “He carries crime on his face!”

Though all Joseph’s blood had flown to his head, he walked the distance
from the place Saint-Jean to the Palais with remarkable calmness and
self-possession. Nevertheless, he was very glad to find himself in the
private office of Monsieur Lousteau-Prangin.

“I need hardly tell you, gentlemen, that I am innocent,” said Joseph,
addressing Monsieur Mouilleron, Monsieur Lousteau-Prangin, and the
clerk. “I can only beg you to assist me in proving my innocence. I know
nothing of this affair.”

When the judge had stated all the suspicious facts which were against
him, ending with Max’s declaration, Joseph was astounded.

“But,” said he, “it was past five o’clock when I left the house. I went
up the Grande rue, and at half-past five I was standing looking up at
the facade of the parish church of Saint-Cyr. I talked there with the
sexton, who came to ring the angelus, and asked him for information
about the building, which seems to me fantastic and incomplete. Then
I passed through the vegetable-market, where some women had already
assembled. From there, crossing the place Misere, I went as far as the
mill of Landrole by the Pont aux Anes, where I watched the ducks for
five or six minutes, and the miller’s men must have noticed me. I saw
the women going to wash; they are probably still there. They made a
little fun of me, and declared that I was not handsome; I told them it
was not all gold that glittered. From there, I followed the long avenue
to Tivoli, where I talked with the gardener. Pray have these facts
verified; and do not even arrest me, for I give you my word of honor
that I will stay quietly in this office till you are convinced of my
innocence.”

These sensible words, said without the least hesitation, and with the
ease of a man who is perfectly sure of his facts, made some impression
on the magistrates.

“Yes, we must find all these persons and summon them,” said Monsieur
Mouilleron; “but it is more than the affair of a day. Make up your mind,
therefore, in your own interests, to be imprisoned in the Palais.”

“Provided I can write to my mother, so as to reassure her, poor
woman--oh! you can read the letter,” he added.

This request was too just not to be granted, and Joseph wrote the
following letter:--

  “Do not be uneasy, dear mother; the mistake of which I am a victim
  can easily be rectified; I have already given them the means of
  doing so. To-morrow, or perhaps this evening, I shall be at
  liberty. I kiss you, and beg you to say to Monsieur and Madame
  Hochon how grieved I am at this affair; in which, however, I have
  had no hand,--it is the result of some chance which, as yet, I do
  not understand.”

When the note reached Madame Bridau, she was suffering from a nervous
attack, and the potions which Monsieur Goddet was trying to make her
swallow were powerless to soothe her. The reading of the letter acted
like balm; after a few quiverings, Agathe subsided into the depression
which always follows such attacks. Later, when Monsieur Goddet returned
to his patient he found her regretting that she had ever quitted Paris.

“Well,” said Madame Hochon to Monsieur Goddet, “how is Monsieur Gilet?”

“His wound, though serious, is not mortal,” replied the doctor. “With
a month’s nursing he will be all right. I left him writing to Monsieur
Mouilleron to request him to set your son at liberty, madame,” he added,
turning to Agathe. “Oh! Max is a fine fellow. I told him what a state
you were in, and he then remembered a circumstance which goes to prove
that the assassin was not your son; the man wore list shoes, whereas it
is certain that Monsieur Joseph left the house in his boots--”

“Ah! God forgive him the harm he has done me--”

The fact was, a man had left a note for Max, after dark, written in
type-letters, which ran as follows:--

  “Captain Gilet ought not to let an innocent man suffer. He who
  struck the blow promises not to strike again if Monsieur Gilet
  will have Monsieur Joseph Bridau set at liberty, without naming
  the man who did it.”

After reading this letter and burning it, Max wrote to Monsieur
Mouilleron stating the circumstance of the list shoes, as reported by
Monsieur Goddet, begging him to set Joseph at liberty, and to come and
see him that he might explain the matter more at length.

By the time this letter was received, Monsieur Lousteau-Prangin had
verified, by the testimony of the bell-ringer, the market-women and
washerwomen, and the miller’s men, the truth of Joseph’s explanation.
Max’s letter made his innocence only the more certain, and Monsieur
Mouilleron himself escorted him back to the Hochons’. Joseph was
greeted with such overflowing tenderness by his mother that the poor
misunderstood son gave thanks to ill-luck--like the husband to the
thief, in La Fontaine’s fable--for a mishap which brought him such
proofs of affection.

“Oh,” said Monsieur Mouilleron, with a self-satisfied air, “I knew at
once by the way you looked at the angry crowd that you were innocent;
but whatever I may have thought, any one who knows Issoudun must also
know that the only way to protect you was to make the arrest as we did.
Ah! you carried your head high.”

“I was thinking of something else,” said the artist simply. “An officer
in the army told me that he was once stopped in Dalmatia under similar
circumstances by an excited populace, in the early morning as he was
returning from a walk. This recollection came into my mind, and I looked
at all those heads with the idea of painting a revolt of the year 1793.
Besides, I kept saying to myself: Blackguard that I am! I have only
got my deserts for coming here to look after an inheritance, instead of
painting in my studio.”

“If you will allow me to offer you a piece of advice,” said the
procureur du roi, “you will take a carriage to-night, which the
postmaster will lend you, and return to Paris by the diligence from
Bourges.”

“That is my advice also,” said Monsieur Hochon, who was burning with a
desire for the departure of his guests.

“My most earnest wish is to get away from Issoudun, though I leave my
only friend here,” said Agathe, kissing Madame Hochon’s hand. “When
shall I see you again?”

“Ah! my dear, never until we meet above. We have suffered enough here
below,” she added in a low voice, “for God to take pity upon us.”

Shortly after, while Monsieur Mouilleron had gone across the way to talk
with Max, Gritte greatly astonished Monsieur and Madame Hochon, Agathe,
Joseph, and Adolphine by announcing the visit of Monsieur Rouget.
Jean-Jacques came to bid his sister good-by, and to offer her his
caleche for the drive to Bourges.

“Ah! your pictures have been a great evil to us,” said Agathe.

“Keep them, my sister,” said the old man, who did not even now believe
in their value.

“Neighbor,” remarked Monsieur Hochon, “our best friends, our surest
defenders, are our own relations; above all, when they are such as your
sister Agathe, and your nephew Joseph.”

“Perhaps so,” said old Rouget in his dull way.

“We ought all to think of ending our days in a Christian manner,” said
Madame Hochon.

“Ah! Jean-Jacques,” said Agathe, “what a day this has been!”

“Will you accept my carriage?” asked Rouget.

“No, brother,” answered Madame Bridau, “I thank you, and wish you health
and comfort.”

Rouget let his sister and nephew kiss him, and then he went away without
manifesting any feeling himself. Baruch, at a hint from his grandfather,
had been to see the postmaster. At eleven o’clock that night, the two
Parisians, ensconced in a wicker cabriolet drawn by one horse and ridden
by a postilion, quitted Issoudun. Adolphine and Madame Hochon parted
from them with tears in their eyes; they alone regretted Joseph and
Agathe.

“They are gone!” said Francois Hochon, going, with the Rabouilleuse,
into Max’s bedroom.

“Well done! the trick succeeded,” answered Max, who was now tired and
feverish.

“But what did you say to old Mouilleron?” asked Francois.

“I told him that I had given my assassin some cause to waylay me; that
he was a dangerous man and likely, if I followed up the affair, to
kill me like a dog before he could be captured. Consequently, I begged
Mouilleron and Prangin to make the most active search ostensibly, but
really to let the assassin go in peace, unless they wished to see me a
dead man.”

“I do hope, Max,” said Flore, “that you will be quiet at night for some
time to come.”

“At any rate, we are delivered from the Parisians!” cried Max. “The
fellow who stabbed me had no idea what a service he was doing us.”

The next day, the departure of the Parisians was celebrated as a victory
of the provinces over Paris by every one in Issoudun, except the more
sober and staid inhabitants, who shared the opinions of Monsieur and
Madame Hochon. A few of Max’s friends spoke very harshly of the Bridaus.

“Do those Parisians fancy we are all idiots,” cried one, “and think they
have only got to hold their hats and catch legacies?”

“They came to fleece, but they have got shorn themselves,” said another;
“the nephew is not to the uncle’s taste.”

“And, if you please, they actually consulted a lawyer in Paris--”

“Ah! had they really a plan?”

“Why, of course,--a plan to get possession of old Rouget. But the
Parisians were not clever enough; that lawyer can’t crow over us
Berrichons!”

“How abominable!”

“That’s Paris for you!”

“The Rabouilleuse knew they came to attack her, and she defended
herself.”

“She did gloriously right!”

To the townspeople at large the Bridaus were Parisians and foreigners;
they preferred Max and Flore.

We can imagine the satisfaction with which, after this campaign, Joseph
and Agathe re-entered their little lodging in the rue Mazarin. On the
journey, the artist recovered his spirits, which had, not unnaturally,
been put to flight by his arrest and twenty-four hours’ confinement; but
he could not cheer up his mother. The Court of Peers was about to begin
the trial of the military conspirators, and that was sufficient to keep
Agathe from recovering her peace of mind. Philippe’s conduct, in
spite of the clever defender whom Desroches recommended to him, roused
suspicions that were unfavorable to his character. In view of this,
Joseph, as soon as he had put Desroches in possession of all that was
going on at Issoudun, started with Mistigris for the chateau of the
Comte de Serizy, to escape hearing about the trial of the conspirators,
which lasted for twenty days.

It is useless to record facts that may be found in contemporaneous
histories. Whether it were that he played a part previously agreed upon,
or that he was really an informer, Philippe was condemned to five years’
surveillance by the police department, and ordered to leave Paris
the same day for Autun, the town which the director-general of police
selected as the place of his exile for five years. This punishment
resembled the detention of prisoners on parole who have a town for a
prison. Learning that the Comte de Serizy, one of the peers appointed by
the Chamber on the court-martial, was employing Joseph to decorate
his chateau at Presles, Desroches begged the minister to grant him an
audience, and found Monsieur de Serizy most amiably disposed toward
Joseph, with whom he had happened to make personal acquaintance.
Desroches explained the financial condition of the two brothers,
recalling the services of the father, and the neglect shown to them
under the Restoration.

“Such injustice, monseigneur,” said the lawyer, “is a lasting cause of
irritation and discontent. You knew the father; give the sons a chance,
at least, of making a fortune--”

And he drew a succinct picture of the situation of the family affairs
at Issoudun, begging the all-powerful vice-president of the Council of
State to take steps to induce the director-general of police to change
Philippe’s place of residence from Autun to Issoudun. He also spoke of
Philippe’s extreme poverty, and asked a dole of sixty francs a month,
which the minister of war ought, he said, for mere shame’s sake, to
grant to a former lieutenant-colonel.

“I will obtain all you ask of me, for I think it just,” replied the
count.

Three days later, Desroches, furnished with the necessary authority,
fetched Philippe from the prison of the Court of Peers, and took him to
his own house, rue de Bethizy. Once there, the young barrister read the
miserable vagabond one of those unanswerable lectures in which lawyers
rate things at their actual value; using plain terms to qualify the
conduct, and to analyze and reduce to their simplest meaning the
sentiments and ideas of clients toward whom they feel enough interest to
speak plainly. After humbling the Emperor’s staff-officer by reproaching
him with his reckless dissipations, his mother’s misfortunes, and the
death of Madame Descoings, he went on to tell him the state of things
at Issoudun, explaining it according to his lights, and probing both the
scheme and the character of Maxence Gilet and the Rabouilleuse to their
depths. Philippe, who was gifted with a keen comprehension in such
directions, listened with much more interest to this part of Desroches’s
lecture than to what had gone before.

“Under these circumstances,” continued the lawyer, “you can repair the
injury you have done to your estimable family,--so far at least as it is
reparable; for you cannot restore life to the poor mother you have all
but killed. But you alone can--”

“What can I do?” asked Philippe.

“I have obtained a change of residence for you from Autun to
Issoudun.--”

Philippe’s sunken face, which had grown almost sinister in expression
and was furrowed with sufferings and privation, instantly lighted up
with a flash of joy.

“And, as I was saying, you alone can recover the inheritance of old
Rouget’s property; half of which may by this time be in the jaws of the
wolf named Gilet,” replied Desroches. “You now know all the particulars,
and it is for you to act accordingly. I suggest no plan; I have no
ideas at all as to that; besides, everything will depend on local
circumstances. You have to deal with a strong force; that fellow is very
astute. The way he attempted to get back the pictures your uncle had
given to Joseph, the audacity with which he laid a crime on your poor
brother’s shoulders, all go to prove that the adversary is capable of
everything. Therefore, be prudent; and try to behave properly out of
policy, if you can’t do so out of decency. Without telling Joseph, whose
artist’s pride would be up in arms, I have sent the pictures to Monsieur
Hochon, telling him to give them up to no one but you. By the way,
Maxence Gilet is a brave man.”

“So much the better,” said Philippe; “I count on his courage for
success; a coward would leave Issoudun.”

“Well,--think of your mother who has been so devoted to you, and of your
brother, whom you made your milch cow.”

“Ah! did he tell you that nonsense?” cried Philippe.

“Am I not the friend of the family, and don’t I know much more about you
than they do?” asked Desroches.

“What do you know?” said Philippe.

“That you betrayed your comrades.”

“I!” exclaimed Philippe. “I! a staff-officer of the Emperor! Absurd!
Why, we fooled the Chamber of Peers, the lawyers, the government, and
the whole of the damned concern. The king’s people were completely
hood-winked.”

“That’s all very well, if it was so,” answered the lawyer. “But, don’t
you see, the Bourbons can’t be overthrown; all Europe is backing them;
and you ought to try to make your peace with the war department,--you
could do that readily enough if you were rich. To get rich, you and your
brother, you must lay hold of your uncle. If you will take the trouble
to manage an affair which needs great cleverness, patience, and caution,
you have enough work before you to occupy your five years.”

“No, no,” cried Philippe, “I must take the bull by the horns at once.
This Maxence may alter the investment of the property and put it in that
woman’s name; and then all would be lost.”

“Monsieur Hochon is a good adviser, and sees clearly; consult him. You
have your orders from the police; I have taken your place in the Orleans
diligence for half-past seven o’clock this evening. I suppose your trunk
is ready; so, now come and dine.”

“I own nothing but what I have got on my back,” said Philippe, opening
his horrible blue overcoat; “but I only need three things, which you
must tell Giroudeau, the uncle of Finot, to send me,--my sabre, my
sword, and my pistols.”

“You need more than that,” said the lawyer, shuddering as he looked at
his client. “You will receive a quarterly stipend which will clothe you
decently.”

“Bless me! are you here, Godeschal?” cried Philippe, recognizing in
Desroches’s head-clerk, as they passed out, the brother of Mariette.

“Yes, I have been with Monsieur Desroches for the last two months.”

“And he will stay with me, I hope, till he gets a business of his own,”
 said Desroches.

“How is Mariette?” asked Philippe, moved at his recollections.

“She is getting ready for the opening of the new theatre.”

“It would cost her little trouble to get my sentence remitted,” said
Philippe. “However, as she chooses!”

After a meagre dinner, given by Desroches who boarded his head-clerk,
the two lawyers put the political convict in the diligence, and wished
him good luck.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XIV

On the second of November, All-Souls’ day, Philippe Bridau appeared
before the commissary of police at Issoudun, to have the date of his
arrival recorded on his papers; and by that functionary’s advice he went
to lodge in the rue l’Avenier. The news of the arrival of an officer,
banished on account of the late military conspiracy, spread rapidly
through the town, and caused all the more excitement when it was known
that this officer was a brother of the painter who had been falsely
accused. Maxence Gilet, by this time entirely recovered from his wound,
had completed the difficult operation of turning all Pere Rouget’s
mortgages into money, and putting the proceeds in one sum, on the
“grand-livre.” The loan of one hundred and forty thousand francs
obtained by the old man on his landed property had caused a great
sensation,--for everything is known in the provinces. Monsieur Hochon,
in the Bridau interest, was much put about by this disaster, and
questioned old Monsieur Heron, the notary at Bourges, as to the object
of it.

“The heirs of old Rouget, if old Rouget changes his mind, ought to make
me a votive offering,” cried Monsieur Heron. “If it had not been for me,
the old fellow would have allowed the fifty thousand francs’ income to
stand in the name of Maxence Gilet. I told Mademoiselle Brazier that
she ought to look to the will only, and not run the risk of a suit
for spoliation, seeing what numerous proofs these transfers in every
direction would give against them. To gain time, I advised Maxence and
his mistress to keep quiet, and let this sudden change in the usual
business habits of the old man be forgotten.”

“Protect the Bridaus, for they have nothing,” said Monsieur Hochon, who,
in addition to other reasons, could not forgive Gilet the terrors he
had endured when fearing the pillage of his house.

Maxence Gilet and Flore Brazier, now secure against all attack, were
very merry over the arrival of another of old Rouget’s nephews. They
knew they were able, at the first signal of danger, to make the old man
sign a power of attorney under which the money in the Funds could
be transferred either to Max or Flore. If the will leaving Flore the
principal should be revoked, an income of fifty thousand francs was a
tolerable consolation,--more particularly after extracting from the real
estate that mortgage of a hundred and forty thousand.

The day after his arrival, Philippe called upon his uncle about ten
o’clock in the morning, anxious to present himself in his dilapidated
clothing. When the convalescent of the Hopital du Midi, the prisoner of
the Luxembourg, entered the room, Flore Brazier felt a shiver pass
over her at the repulsive sight. Gilet himself was conscious of that
particular disturbance both of mind and body, by which Nature sometimes
warns us of a latent enmity, or a coming danger. If there was something
indescribably sinister in Philippe’s countenance, due to his recent
misfortunes, the effect was heightened by his clothes. His forlorn blue
great-coat was buttoned in military fashion to the throat, for painful
reasons; and yet it showed much that it pretended to conceal. The bottom
edges of the trousers, ragged like those of an almshouse beggar, were
the sign of abject poverty. The boots left wet marks on the floor, as
the mud oozed from fissures in the soles. The gray hat, held in his
hand, was greasy round the rim. The malacca cane, its polish long gone,
must have stood in the corners of many cafés. Above the velvet collar,
rubbed until the frame showed through, rose a head like that which
actors use for the last act in “The Life of a Gambler,”--the exhaustion
of a man still in the prime of life betrayed by the metallic, brassy
skin, discolored as if with verdigris. Such tints are seen on the faces
of debauched gamblers who spend their nights in play: the eyes are
sunken, the lids reddened rather than bright, the brow menacing from
the wreck it reveals. Philippe’s cheeks, sunken and wrinkled, showed
signs of the illness from which he had scarcely recovered. His head was
bald except for a fringe of hair at the back ending at the ears. The
pure blue of his brilliant eyes had acquired the cold tones of polished
steel.

“Good-morning, uncle,” he said, in a hoarse voice. “I am your
nephew, Philippe Bridau,--a specimen of how the Bourbons treat a
lieutenant-colonel, an old soldier of the old army, one who carried the
Emperor’s orders at the battle of Montereau. If my coat were to open, I
should be put to shame in presence of Mademoiselle. Well, it is the
rule of the game! We hoped to begin it again; we tried it, and we have
failed! I am to reside in your city by the order of the police, with a
full pay of sixty francs a month. So the inhabitants needn’t fear that
I shall raise the price of provisions! I see you are in good and lovely
company.”

“Ah! you are my nephew,” said Jean-Jacques.

“Invite monsieur le colonel to breakfast with us,” said Flore.

“No, I thank you, madame,” answered Philippe, “I have breakfasted.
Besides, I would cut off my hand sooner than ask a bit of bread or
a farthing from my uncle, after the treatment my mother and brother
received in this town. It did not seem proper, however, that I should
settle here, in Issoudun, without paying my respects to him from time
to time. You can do what you like,” he added, offering the old man his
hand, into which Rouget put his own, which Philippe shook, “--whatever
you like. I shall have nothing to say against it; provided the honor of
the Bridaus is untouched.”

Gilet could look at the lieutenant-colonel as much as he pleased, for
Philippe pointedly avoided casting his eyes in his direction. Max,
though the blood boiled in his veins, was too well aware of the
importance of behaving with political prudence--which occasionally
resembles cowardice--to take fire like a young man; he remained,
therefore, perfectly calm and cold.

“It wouldn’t be right, monsieur,” said Flore, “to live on sixty francs
a month under the nose of an uncle who has forty thousand francs a year,
and who has already behaved so kindly to Captain Gilet, his natural
relation, here present--”

“Yes, Philippe,” cried the old man, “you must see that!”

On Flore’s presentation, Philippe made a half-timid bow to Max.

“Uncle, I have some pictures to return to you; they are now at Monsieur
Hochon’s. Will you be kind enough to come over some day and identify
them.”

Saying these last words in a curt tone, lieutenant-colonel Philippe
Bridau departed. The tone of his visit made, if possible, a deeper
impression on Flore’s mind, and also on that of Max, than the shock
they had felt at the first sight of that horrible campaigner. As soon
as Philippe had slammed the door, with the violence of a disinherited
heir, Max and Flore hid behind the window-curtains to watch him as he
crossed the road to the Hochons’.

“What a vagabond!” exclaimed Flore, questioning Max with a glance.

“Yes; unfortunately there were men like him in the armies of the
Emperor; I sent seven to the shades at Cabrera,” answered Gilet.

“I do hope, Max, that you won’t pick a quarrel with that fellow,” said
Mademoiselle Brazier.

“He smelt so of tobacco,” complained the old man.

“He was smelling after your money-bags,” said Flore, in a peremptory
tone. “My advice is that you don’t let him into the house again.”

“I’d prefer not to,” replied Rouget.

“Monsieur,” said Gritte, entering the room where the Hochon family were
all assembled after breakfast, “here is the Monsieur Bridau you were
talking about.”

Philippe made his entrance politely, in the midst of a dead silence
caused by general curiosity. Madame Hochon shuddered from head to foot
as she beheld the author of all Agathe’s woes and the murderer of good
old Madame Descoings. Adolphine also felt a shock of fear. Baruch
and Francois looked at each other in surprise. Old Hochon kept his
self-possession, and offered a seat to the son of Madame Bridau.

“I have come, monsieur,” said Philippe, “to introduce myself to you; I
am forced to consider how I can manage to live here, for five years, on
sixty francs a month.”

“It can be done,” said the octogenarian.

Philippe talked about things in general, with perfect propriety. He
mentioned the journalist Lousteau, nephew of the old lady, as a “rara
avis,” and won her good graces from the moment she heard him say that
the name of Lousteau would become celebrated. He did not hesitate to
admit his faults of conduct. To a friendly admonition which Madame
Hochon addressed to him in a low voice, he replied that he had reflected
deeply while in prison, and could promise that in future he would live
another life.

On a hint from Philippe, Monsieur Hochon went out with him when he took
his leave. When the miser and the soldier reached the boulevard Baron,
a place where no one could overhear them, the colonel turned to the old
man,--

“Monsieur,” he said, “if you will be guided by me, we will never speak
together of matters and things, or people either, unless we are walking
in the open country, or in places where we cannot be heard. Maitre
Desroches has fully explained to me the influence of the gossip of a
little town. Therefore I don’t wish you to be suspected of advising me;
though Desroches has told me to ask for your advice, and I beg you not
to be chary of giving it. We have a powerful enemy in our front, and it
won’t do to neglect any precaution which may help to defeat him. In the
first place, therefore, excuse me if I do not call upon you again.
A little coldness between us will clear you of all suspicion of
influencing my conduct. When I want to consult you, I will pass
along the square at half-past nine, just as you are coming out after
breakfast. If you see me carry my cane on my shoulder, that will mean
that we must meet--accidentally--in some open space which you will point
out to me.”

“I see you are a prudent man, bent on success,” said old Hochon.

“I shall succeed, monsieur. First of all, give me the names of the
officers of the old army now living in Issoudun, who have not taken
sides with Maxence Gilet; I wish to make their acquaintance.”

“Well, there’s a captain of the artillery of the Guard, Monsieur
Mignonnet, a man about forty years of age, who was brought up at the
Ecole Polytechnique, and lives in a quiet way. He is a very honorable
man, and openly disapproves of Max, whose conduct he considers unworthy
of a true soldier.”

“Good!” remarked the lieutenant-colonel.

“There are not many soldiers here of that stripe,” resumed Monsieur
Hochon; “the only other that I know is an old cavalry captain.”

“That is my arm,” said Philippe. “Was he in the Guard?”

“Yes,” replied Monsieur Hochon. “Carpentier was, in 1810, sergeant-major
in the dragoons; then he rose to be sub-lieutenant in the line, and
subsequently captain of cavalry.”

“Giroudeau may know him,” thought Philippe.

“This Monsieur Carpentier took the place in the mayor’s office which
Gilet threw up; he is a friend of Monsieur Mignonnet.”

“How can I earn my living here?”

“They are going, I think, to establish a mutual insurance agency in
Issoudun, for the department of the Cher; you might get a place in it,
but the pay won’t be more than fifty francs a month at the outside.”

“That will be enough.”

At the end of a week Philippe had a new suit of clothes,--coat,
waistcoat, and trousers,--of good blue Elbeuf cloth, bought on credit,
to be paid for at so much a month; also new boots, buckskin gloves, and
a hat. Giroudeau sent him some linen, with his weapons and a letter for
Carpentier, who had formerly served under Giroudeau. The letter secured
him Carpentier’s good-will, and the latter presented him to his friend
Mignonnet as a man of great merit and the highest character. Philippe
won the admiration of these worthy officers by confiding to them a few
facts about the late conspiracy, which was, as everybody knows, the
last attempt of the old army against the Bourbons; for the affair of the
sergeants at La Rochelle belongs to another order of ideas.

Warned by the fate of the conspiracy of the 19th of August, 1820, and
of those of Berton and Caron, the soldiers of the old army resigned
themselves, after their failure in 1822, to await events. This last
conspiracy, which grew out of that of the 19th of August, was really
a continuation of the latter, carried on by a better element. Like its
predecessor, it was absolutely unknown to the royal government. Betrayed
once more, the conspirators had the wit to reduce their vast enterprise
to the puny proportions of a barrack plot. This conspiracy, in which
several regiments of cavalry, infantry, and artillery were concerned,
had its centre in the north of France. The strong places along the
frontier were to be captured at a blow. If success had followed, the
treaties of 1815 would have been broken by a federation with Belgium,
which, by a military compact made among the soldiers, was to withdraw
from the Holy Alliance. Two thrones would have been plunged in a moment
into the vortex of this sudden cyclone. Instead of this formidable
scheme--concerted by strong minds and supported by personages of high
rank--being carried out, one small part of it, and that only, was
discovered and brought before the Court of Peers. Philippe Bridau
consented to screen the leaders, who retired the moment the plot was
discovered (either by treachery or accident), and from their seats in
both Chambers lent their co-operation to the inquiry only to work for
the ultimate success of their purpose at the heart of the government.

To recount this scheme, which, since 1830, the Liberals have openly
confessed in all its ramifications, would trench upon the domain of
history and involve too long a digression. This glimpse of it is enough
to show the double part which Philippe Bridau undertook to play. The
former staff-officer of the Emperor was to lead a movement in Paris
solely for the purpose of masking the real conspiracy and occupying the
mind of the government at its centre, while the great struggle should
burst forth at the north. When the latter miscarried before discovery,
Philippe was ordered to break all links connecting the two plots, and to
allow the secrets of the secondary plot only to become known. For
this purpose, his abject misery, to which his state of health and his
clothing bore witness, was amply sufficient to undervalue the character
of the conspiracy and reduce its proportions in the eyes of the
authorities. The role was well suited to the precarious position of
the unprincipled gambler. Feeling himself astride of both parties, the
crafty Philippe played the saint to the royal government, all the while
retaining the good opinion of the men in high places who were of
the other party,--determined to cast in his lot at a later day with
whichever side he might then find most to his advantage.

These revelations as to the vast bearings of the real conspiracy made
Philippe a man of great distinction in the eyes of Carpentier and
Mignonnet, to whom his self-devotion seemed a state-craft worthy of the
palmy days of the Convention. In a short time the tricky Bonapartist
was seen to be on friendly terms with the two officers, and the
consideration they enjoyed in the town was, of course, shared by him.
He soon obtained, through their recommendation, the situation in the
insurance office that old Hochon had suggested, which required only
three hours of his day. Mignonnet and Carpentier put him up at their
club, where his good manners and bearing, in keeping with the high
opinion which the two officers expressed about him, won him a respect
often given to external appearances that are only deceitful.

Philippe, whose conduct was carefully considered and planned, had
indeed made many reflections while in prison as to the inconveniences
of leading a debauched life. He did not need Desroches’s lecture to
understand the necessity of conciliating the people at Issoudun by
decent, sober, and respectable conduct. Delighted to attract Max’s
ridicule by behaving with the propriety of a Mignonnet, he went further,
and endeavored to lull Gilet’s suspicions by deceiving him as to his
real character. He was bent on being taken for a fool by appearing
generous and disinterested; all the while drawing a net around his
adversary, and keeping his eye on his uncle’s property. His mother and
brother, on the contrary, who were really disinterested, generous,
and lofty, had been accused of greed because they had acted with
straightforward simplicity. Philippe’s covetousness was fully roused by
Monsieur Hochon, who gave him all the details of his uncle’s property.
In the first secret conversation which he held with the octogenarian,
they agreed that Philippe must not awaken Max’s suspicions; for the game
would be lost if Flore and Max were to carry off their victim, though no
further than Bourges.

Once a week the colonel dined with Mignonnet; another day with
Carpentier; and every Thursday with Monsieur Hochon. At the end of three
weeks he received other invitations for the remaining days, so that he
had little more than his breakfast to provide. He never spoke of
his uncle, nor of the Rabouilleuse, nor of Gilet, unless it were in
connection with his mother and his brother’s stay in Issoudun. The three
officers--the only soldiers in the town who were decorated, and among
whom Philippe had the advantage of the rosette, which in the eyes of
all provincials gave him a marked superiority--took a habit of walking
together every day before dinner, keeping, as the saying is, to
themselves. This reserve and tranquillity of demeanor had an
excellent effect on Issoudun. All Max’s adherents thought Philippe a
“sabreur,”--an expression applied by soldiers to the commonest sort of
courage in their superior officers, while denying that they possess the
requisite qualities of a commander.

“He is a very honorable man,” said Goddet the surgeon, to Max.

“Bah!” replied Gilet, “his behavior before the Court of Peers proves him
to have been either a dupe or a spy; he is, as you say, ninny enough to
have been duped by the great players.”

After obtaining his situation, Philippe, who was well informed as to
the gossip of the town, wished to conceal certain circumstances of his
present life as much as possible from the knowledge of the inhabitants;
he therefore went to live in a house at the farther end of the faubourg
Saint-Paterne, to which was attached a large garden. Here he was able
in the utmost secrecy to fence with Carpentier, who had been a
fencing-master in the infantry before entering the cavalry. Philippe
soon recovered his early dexterity, and learned other and new secrets
from Carpentier, which convinced him that he need not fear the prowess
of any adversary. This done, he began openly to practise with pistols,
with Mignonnet and Carpentier, declaring it was for amusement, but
really intending to make Max believe that, in case of a duel, he should
rely on that weapon. Whenever Philippe met Gilet he waited for him to
bow first, and answered the salutation by touching the brim of his hat
cavalierly, as an officer acknowledges the salute of a private. Maxence
Gilet gave no sign of impatience or displeasure; he never uttered a
single word about Bridau at the Cognettes’ where he still gave suppers;
although, since Fario’s attack, the pranks of the Order of Idleness were
temporarily suspended.

After a while, however, the contempt shown by Lieutenant-colonel Bridau
for the former cavalry captain, Gilet, was a settled fact, which certain
Knights of Idleness, who were less bound to Max than Francois, Baruch,
and three or four others, discussed among themselves. They were much
surprised to see the violent and fiery Max behave with such discretion.
No one in Issoudun, not even Potel or Renard, dared broach so delicate
a subject with him. Potel, somewhat disturbed by this open
misunderstanding between two heroes of the Imperial Guard, suggested
that Max might be laying a net for the colonel; he asserted that some
new scheme might be looked for from the man who had got rid of the
mother and one brother by making use of Fario’s attack upon him, the
particulars of which were now no longer a mystery. Monsieur Hochon had
taken care to reveal the truth of Max’s atrocious accusation to the best
people of the town. Thus it happened that in talking over the situation
of the lieutenant-colonel in relation to Max, and in trying to guess
what might spring from their antagonism, the whole town regarded the two
men, from the start, as adversaries.

Philippe, who had carefully investigated all the circumstances of his
brother’s arrest and the antecedents of Gilet and the Rabouilleuse, was
finally brought into rather close relations with Fario, who lived near
him. After studying the Spaniard, Philippe thought he might trust a man
of that quality. The two found their hatred so firm a bond of union,
that Fario put himself at Philippe’s disposal, and related all that
he knew about the Knights of Idleness. Philippe promised, in case he
succeeded in obtaining over his uncle the power now exercised by Gilet,
to indemnify Fario for his losses; this bait made the Spaniard his
henchman. Maxence was now face to face with a dangerous foe; he had, as
they say in those parts, some one to handle. Roused by much gossip and
various rumors, the town of Issoudun expected a mortal combat between
the two men, who, we must remark, mutually despised each other.

One morning, toward the end of November, Philippe met Monsieur Hochon
about twelve o’clock, in the long avenue of Frapesle, and said to him:--

“I have discovered that your grandsons Baruch and Francois are the
intimate friends of Maxence Gilet. The rascals are mixed up in all the
pranks that are played about this town at night. It was through them
that Maxence knew what was said in your house when my mother and brother
were staying there.”

“How did you get proof of such a monstrous thing?”

“I overheard their conversation one night as they were leaving a
drinking-shop. Your grandsons both owe Max more than three thousand
francs. The scoundrel told the lads to try and find out our intentions;
he reminded them that you had once thought of getting round my uncle
by priestcraft, and declared that nobody but you could guide me; for he
thinks, fortunately, that I am nothing more than a ‘sabreur.’”

“My grandsons! is it possible?”

“Watch them,” said Philippe. “You will see them coming home along the
place Saint-Jean, at two or three o’clock in the morning, as tipsy as
champagne-corks, and in company with Gilet--”

“That’s why the scamps keep so sober at home!” cried Monsieur Hochon.

“Fario has told me all about their nocturnal proceedings,” resumed
Philippe; “without him, I should never have suspected them. My uncle is
held down under an absolute thraldom, if I may judge by certain things
which the Spaniard has heard Max say to your boys. I suspect Max and
the Rabouilleuse of a scheme to make sure of the fifty thousand francs’
income from the Funds, and then, after pulling that feather from their
pigeon’s wing, to run away, I don’t know where, and get married. It is
high time to know what is going on under my uncle’s roof, but I don’t
see how to set about it.”

“I will think of it,” said the old man.

They separated, for several persons were now approaching.

Never, at any time in his life, did Jean-Jacques suffer as he had done
since the first visit of his nephew Philippe. Flore was terrified by the
presentiment of some evil that threatened Max. Weary of her master, and
fearing that he might live to be very old, since he was able to bear
up under their criminal practices, she formed the very simple plan of
leaving Issoudun and being married to Maxence in Paris, after obtaining
from Jean-Jacques the transfer of the income in the Funds. The old
bachelor, guided, not by any justice to his family, nor by personal
avarice, but solely by his passion, steadily refused to make the
transfer, on the ground that Flore was to be his sole heir. The unhappy
creature knew to what extent Flore loved Max, and he believed he would
be abandoned the moment she was made rich enough to marry. When Flore,
after employing the tenderest cajoleries, was unable to succeed, she
tried rigor; she no longer spoke to her master; Vedie was sent to wait
upon him, and found him in the morning with his eyes swollen and red
with weeping. For a week or more, poor Rouget had breakfasted alone, and
Heaven knows on what food!

The day after Philippe’s conversation with Monsieur Hochon, he
determined to pay a second visit to his uncle, whom he found much
changed. Flore stayed beside the old man, speaking tenderly and looking
at him with much affection; she played the comedy so well that Philippe
guessed some immediate danger, merely from the solicitude thus displayed
in his presence. Gilet, whose policy it was to avoid all collision with
Philippe, did not appear. After watching his uncle and Flore for a time
with a discerning eye, the colonel judged that the time had come to
strike his grand blow.

“Adieu, my dear uncle,” he said, rising as if to leave the house.

“Oh! don’t go yet,” cried the old man, who was comforted by Flore’s
false tenderness. “Dine with us, Philippe.”

“Yes, if you will come and take a walk with me.”

“Monsieur is very feeble,” interposed Mademoiselle Brazier; “just now he
was unwilling even to go out in the carriage,” she added, turning upon
the old man the fixed look with which keepers quell a maniac.

Philippe took Flore by the arm, compelling her to look at him, and
looking at her in return as fixedly as she had just looked at her
victim.

“Tell me, mademoiselle,” he said, “is it a fact that my uncle is not
free to take a walk with me?”

“Why, yes he is, monsieur,” replied Flore, who was unable to make any
other answer.

“Very well. Come, uncle. Mademoiselle, give him his hat and cane.”

“But--he never goes out without me. Do you, monsieur?”

“Yes, Philippe, yes; I always want her--”

“It would be better to take the carriage,” said Flore.

“Yes, let us take the carriage,” cried the old man, in his anxiety to
make his two tyrants agree.

“Uncle, you will come with me, alone, and on foot, or I shall never
return here; I shall know that the town of Issoudun tells the truth,
when it declares you are under the dominion of Mademoiselle Flore
Brazier. That my uncle should love you, is all very well,” he resumed,
holding Flore with a fixed eye; “that you should not love my uncle is
also on the cards; but when it comes to your making him unhappy--halt!
If people want to get hold of an inheritance, they must earn it. Are you
coming, uncle?”

Philippe saw the eyes of the poor imbecile roving from himself to Flore,
in painful hesitation.

“Ha! that’s how it is, is it?” resumed the lieutenant-colonel. “Well,
adieu, uncle. Mademoiselle, I kiss your hands.”

He turned quickly when he reached the door, and caught Flore in the act
of making a menacing gesture at his uncle.

“Uncle,” he said, “if you wish to go with me, I will meet you at your
door in ten minutes: I am now going to see Monsieur Hochon. If you and
I do not take that walk, I shall take upon myself to make some others
walk.”

So saying, he went away, and crossed the place Saint-Jean to the
Hochons.

Every one can imagine the scenes which the revelations made by Philippe
to Monsieur Hochon had brought about within that family. At nine
o’clock, old Monsieur Heron, the notary, presented himself with a bundle
of papers, and found a fire in the hall which the old miser, contrary
to all his habits, had ordered to be lighted. Madame Hochon, already
dressed at this unusual hour, was sitting in her armchair at the
corner of the fireplace. The two grandsons, warned the night before by
Adolphine that a storm was gathering about their heads, had been ordered
to stay in the house. Summoned now by Gritte, they were alarmed at the
formal preparations of their grandparents, whose coldness and anger they
had been made to feel in the air for the last twenty-four hours.

“Don’t rise for them,” said their grandfather to Monsieur Heron; “you
see before you two miscreants, unworthy of pardon.”

“Oh, grandpapa!” said Francois.

“Be silent!” said the old man sternly. “I know of your nocturnal life
and your intimacy with Monsieur Maxence Gilet. But you will meet him no
more at Mere Cognette’s at one in the morning; for you will not leave
this house, either of you, until you go to your respective destinations.
Ha! it was you who ruined Fario, was it? you, who have narrowly escaped
the police-courts--Hold your tongue!” he said, seeing that Baruch was
about to speak. “You both owe money to Monsieur Maxence Gilet; who,
for six years, has paid for your debauchery. Listen, both of you, to my
guardianship accounts; after that, I shall have more to say. You will
see, after these papers are read, whether you can still trifle with
me,--still trifle with family laws by betraying the secrets of this
house, and reporting to a Monsieur Maxence Gilet what is said and what
is done here. For three thousand francs, you became spies; for ten
thousand, you would, no doubt, become assassins. You did almost kill
Madame Bridau; for Monsieur Gilet knew very well it was Fario who
stabbed him when he threw the crime upon my guest, Monsieur Joseph
Bridau. If that jail-bird did so wicked an act, it was because you told
him what Madame Bridau meant to do. You, my grandsons, the spies of
such a man! You, house-breakers and marauders! Don’t you know that
your worthy leader killed a poor young woman, in 1806? I will not have
assassins and thieves in my family. Pack your things; you shall go hang
elsewhere!”

The two young men turned white and stiff as plaster casts.

“Read on, Monsieur Heron,” said Hochon.

The old notary read the guardianship accounts; from which it appeared
that the net fortune of the two Borniche children amounted to seventy
thousand francs, a sum derived from the dowry of their mother: but
Monsieur Hochon had lent his daughter various large sums, and was
now, as creditor, the owner of a part of the property of his Borniche
grandchildren. The portion coming to Baruch amounted to only twenty
thousand francs.

“Now you are rich,” said the old man, “take your money, and go. I remain
master of my own property and that of Madame Hochon, who in this matter
shares all my intentions, and I shall give it to whom I choose; namely,
our dear Adolphine. Yes, we can marry her if we please to the son of a
peer of France, for she will be an heiress.”

“A noble fortune!” said Monsieur Heron.

“Monsieur Maxence Gilet will make up this loss to you,” said Madame
Hochon.

“Let my hard-saved money go to a scapegrace like you? no, indeed!” cried
Monsieur Hochon.

“Forgive me!” stammered Baruch.

“‘Forgive, and I won’t do it again,’” sneered the old man, imitating a
child’s voice. “If I were to forgive you, and let you out of this house,
you would go and tell Monsieur Maxence what has happened, and warn him
to be on his guard. No, no, my little men. I shall keep my eye on you,
and I have means of knowing what you do. As you behave, so shall I
behave to you. It will be by a long course of good conduct, not that of
a day or a month, but of years, that I shall judge you. I am strong
on my legs, my eyes are good, my health is sound; I hope to live long
enough to see what road you take. Your first move will be to Paris,
where you will study banking under Messieurs Mongenod and Sons. Ill-luck
to you if you don’t walk straight; you will be watched. Your property is
in the hand of Messieurs Mongenod; here is a cheque for the amount.
Now then, release me as guardian, and sign the accounts, and also this
receipt,” he added, taking the papers from Monsieur Heron and handing
them to Baruch.

“As for you, Francois Hochon, you owe me money instead of having any
to receive,” said the old man, looking at his other grandson. “Monsieur
Heron, read his account; it is all clear--perfectly clear.”

The reading was done in the midst of perfect stillness.

“You will have six hundred francs a year, and with that you will go
to Poitiers and study law,” said the grandfather, when the notary had
finished. “I had a fine life in prospect for you; but now, you must earn
your living as a lawyer. Ah! my young rascals, you have deceived me for
six years; you now know it has taken me but one hour to get even with
you: I have seven-leagued boots.”

Just as old Monsieur Heron was preparing to leave with the signed
papers, Gritte announced Colonel Bridau. Madame Hochon left the room,
taking her grandsons with her, that she might, as old Hochon said,
confess them privately and find out what effect this scene had produced
upon them.

Philippe and the old man stood in the embrasure of a window and spoke in
low tones.

“I have been reflecting on the state of your affairs over there,” said
Monsieur Hochon pointing to the Rouget house. “I have just had a talk
with Monsieur Heron. The security for the fifty thousand francs a
year from the property in the Funds cannot be sold unless by the owner
himself or some one with a power of attorney from him. Now, since
your arrival here, your uncle has not signed any such power before
any notary; and, as he has not left Issoudun, he can’t have signed one
elsewhere. If he attempts to give a power of attorney here, we shall
know it instantly; if he goes away to give one, we shall also know it,
for it will have to be registered, and that excellent Heron has means of
finding it out. Therefore, if Rouget leaves Issoudun, have him followed,
learn where he goes, and we will find a way to discover what he does.”

“The power of attorney has not been given,” said Philippe; “they are
trying to get it; but--they--will--not--suc--ceed--” added the vagabond,
whose eye just then caught sight of his uncle on the steps of the
opposite house: he pointed him out to Monsieur Hochon, and related
succinctly the particulars, at once so petty and so important, of his
visit.

“Maxence is afraid of me, but he can’t evade me. Mignonnet says that all
the officers of the old army who are in Issoudun give a yearly banquet
on the anniversary of the Emperor’s coronation; so Maxence Gilet and I
are sure to meet in a few days.”

“If he gets a power of attorney by the morning of the first of
December,” said Hochon, “he might take the mail-post for Paris, and give
up the banquet.”

“Very good. The first thing is, then, to get possession of my uncle;
I’ve an eye that cows a fool,” said Philippe, giving Monsieur Hochon an
atrocious glance that made the old man tremble.

“If they let him walk with you, Maxence must believe he has found some
means to win the game,” remarked the old miser.

“Oh! Fario is on the watch,” said Philippe, “and he is not alone. That
Spaniard has discovered one of my old soldiers in the neighborhood of
Vatan, a man I once did some service to. Without any one’s suspecting
it, Benjamin Bourdet is under Fario’s orders, who has lent him a horse
to get about with.”

“If you kill that monster who has corrupted my grandsons, I shall say
you have done a good deed.”

“Thanks to me, the town of Issoudun now knows what Monsieur Maxence
Gilet has been doing at night for the last six years,” replied Philippe;
“and the cackle, as you call it here, is now started on him. Morally his
day is over.”

The moment Philippe left his uncle’s house Flore went to Max’s room to
tell him every particular of the nephew’s bold visit.

“What’s to be done?” she asked.

“Before trying the last means,--which will be to fight that big
reprobate,” replied Maxence, “--we must play double or quits, and try
our grand stroke. Let the old idiot go with his nephew.”

“But that big brute won’t mince matters,” remonstrated Flore; “he’ll
call things by their right names.”

“Listen to me,” said Maxence in a harsh voice. “Do you think I’ve
not kept my ears open, and reflected about how we stand? Send to Pere
Cognette for a horse and a char-a-banc, and say we want them instantly:
they must be here in five minutes. Pack all your belongings, take Vedie,
and go to Vatan. Settle yourself there as if you mean to stay; carry off
the twenty thousand francs in gold which the old fellow has got in his
drawer. If I bring him to you in Vatan, you are to refuse to come back
here unless he signs the power of attorney. As soon as we get it I’ll
slip off to Paris, while you’re returning to Issoudun. When Jean-Jacques
gets back from his walk and finds you gone, he’ll go beside himself, and
want to follow you. Well! when he does, I’ll give him a talking to.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XV

While the foregoing plot was progressing, Philippe was walking arm in
arm with his uncle along the boulevard Baron.

“The two great tacticians are coming to close quarters at last,” thought
Monsieur Hochon as he watched the colonel marching off with his uncle;
“I am curious to see the end of the game, and what becomes of the stake
of ninety thousand francs a year.”

“My dear uncle,” said Philippe, whose phraseology had a flavor of his
affinities in Paris, “you love this girl, and you are devilishly right.
She is damnably handsome! Instead of billing and cooing she makes you
trot like a valet; well, that’s simple enough; but she wants to see
you six feet underground, so that she may marry Max, whom she adores.”

“I know that, Philippe, but I love her all the same.”

“Well, I have sworn by the soul of my mother, who is your own sister,”
continued Philippe, “to make your Rabouilleuse as supple as my glove,
and the same as she was before that scoundrel, who is unworthy to have
served in the Imperial Guard, ever came to quarter himself in your
house.”

“Ah! if you could do that!--” said the old man.

“It is very easy,” answered Philippe, cutting his uncle short. “I’ll
kill Max as I would a dog; but--on one condition,” added the old
campaigner.

“What is that?” said Rouget, looking at his nephew in a stupid way.

“Don’t sign that power of attorney which they want of you before the
third of December; put them off till then. Your torturers only want it
to enable them to sell the fifty thousand a year you have in the Funds,
so that they may run off to Paris and pay for their wedding festivities
out of your millions.”

“I am afraid so,” replied Rouget.

“Well, whatever they may say or do to you, put off giving that power of
attorney until next week.”

“Yes; but when Flore talks to me she stirs my very soul, till I don’t
know what I do. I give you my word, when she looks at me in a certain
way, her blue eyes seem like paradise, and I am no longer master of
myself,--especially when for some days she had been harsh to me.”

“Well, whether she is sweet or sour, don’t do more than promise to sign
the paper, and let me know the night before you are going to do it. That
will answer. Maxence shall not be your proxy unless he first kills
me. If I kill him, you must agree to take me in his place, and I’ll
undertake to break in that handsome girl and keep her at your beck
and call. Yes, Flore shall love you, and if she doesn’t satisfy
you--thunder! I’ll thrash her.”

“Oh! I never could allow that. A blow struck at Flore would break my
heart.”

“But it is the only way to govern women and horses. A man makes himself
feared, or loved, or respected. Now that is what I wanted to whisper in
your ear--Good-morning, gentlemen,” he said to Mignonnet and Carpentier,
who came up at the moment; “I am taking my uncle for a walk, as you
see, and trying to improve him; for we are in an age when children are
obliged to educate their grandparents.”

They all bowed to each other.

“You behold in my dear uncle the effects of an unhappy passion. Those
two want to strip him of his fortune and leave him in the lurch--you
know to whom I refer? He sees the plot; but he hasn’t the courage to
give up his SUGAR-PLUM for a few days so as to baffle it.”

Philippe briefly explained his uncle’s position.

“Gentlemen,” he remarked, in conclusion, “you see there are no two ways
of saving him: either Colonel Bridau must kill Captain Gilet, or Captain
Gilet must kill Colonel Bridau. We celebrate the Emperor’s coronation
on the day after to-morrow; I rely upon you to arrange the seats at the
banquet so that I shall sit opposite to Gilet. You will do me the honor,
I hope, of being my seconds.”

“We will appoint you to preside, and sit ourselves on either side
of you. Max, as vice-president, will of course sit opposite,” said
Mignonnet.

“Oh! the scoundrel will have Potel and Renard with him,” said
Carpentier. “In spite of all that Issoudun now knows and says of his
midnight maraudings, those two worthy officers, who have already been
his seconds, remain faithful to him.”

“You see how it all maps out, uncle,” said Philippe. “Therefore, sign
no paper before the third of December; the next day you shall be free,
happy, and beloved by Flore, without having to coax for it.”

“You don’t know him, Philippe,” said the terrified old man. “Maxence has
killed nine men in duels.”

“Yes; but ninety thousand francs a year didn’t depend on it,” answered
Philippe.

“A bad conscience shakes the hand,” remarked Mignonnet sententiously.

“In a few days from now,” resumed Philippe, “you and the Rabouilleuse
will be living together as sweet as honey,--that is, after she gets
through mourning. At first she’ll twist like a worm, and yelp, and weep;
but never mind, let the water run!”

The two soldiers approved of Philippe’s arguments, and tried to hearten
up old Rouget, with whom they walked about for nearly two hours. At last
Philippe took his uncle home, saying as they parted:--

“Don’t take any steps without me. I know women. I have paid for one, who
cost me far more than Flore can ever cost you. But she taught me how to
behave to the fair sex for the rest of my days. Women are bad children;
they are inferior animals to men; we must make them fear us; the worst
condition in the world is to be governed by such brutes.”

It was about half-past two in the afternoon when the old man got home.
Kouski opened the door in tears,--that is, by Max’s orders, he gave
signs of weeping.

“Oh! Monsieur, Madame has gone away, and taken Vedie with her!”

“Gone--a--way!” said the old man in a strangled voice.

The blow was so violent that Rouget sat down on the stairs, unable to
stand. A moment after, he rose, looked about the hall, into the kitchen,
went up to his own room, searched all the chambers, and returned to the
salon, where he threw himself into a chair, and burst into tears.

“Where is she?” he sobbed. “Oh! where is she? where is Max?”

“I don’t know,” answered Kouski. “The captain went out without telling
me.”

Gilet thought it politic to be seen sauntering about the town. By
leaving the old man alone with his despair, he knew he should make him
feel his desertion the more keenly, and reduce him to docility. To keep
Philippe from assisting his uncle at this crisis, he had given Kouski
strict orders not to open the door to any one. Flore away, the miserable
old man grew frantic, and the situation of things approached a crisis.
During his walk through the town, Maxence Gilet was avoided by many
persons who a day or two earlier would have hastened to shake hands with
him. A general reaction had set in against him. The deeds of the Knights
of Idleness were ringing on every tongue. The tale of Joseph Bridau’s
arrest, now cleared up, disgraced Max in the eyes of all; and his life
and conduct received in one day their just award. Gilet met Captain
Potel, who was looking for him, and seemed almost beside himself.

“What’s the matter with you, Potel?”

“My dear fellow, the Imperial Guard is being black-guarded all over the
town! These civilians are crying you down! and it goes to the bottom of
my heart.”

“What are they complaining of?” asked Max.

“Of what you do at night.”

“As if we couldn’t amuse ourselves a little!”

“But that isn’t all,” said Potel.

Potel belonged to the same class as the officer who replied to the
burgomasters: “Eh! your town will be paid for, if we do burn it!” So he
was very little troubled about the deeds of the Order of Idleness.

“What more?” inquired Gilet.

“The Guard is against the Guard. It is that that breaks my heart. Bridau
has set all these bourgeois on you. The Guard against the Guard! no, it
ought not to be! You can’t back down, Max; you must meet Bridau. I had a
great mind to pick a quarrel with the low scoundrel myself and send him
to the shades; I wish I had, and then the bourgeois wouldn’t have seen
the spectacle of the Guard against the Guard. In war times, I don’t
say anything against it. Two heroes of the Guard may quarrel, and
fight,--but at least there are no civilians to look on and sneer. No, I
say that big villain never served in the Guard. A guardsman would never
behave as he does to another guardsman, under the very eyes of the
bourgeois; impossible! Ah! it’s all wrong; the Guard is disgraced--and
here, at Issoudun! where it was once so honored.”

“Come, Potel, don’t worry yourself,” answered Max; “even if you do not
see me at the banquet--”

“What! do you mean that you won’t be there the day after to-morrow?”
cried Potel, interrupting his friend. “Do you wish to be called a
coward? and have it said you are running away from Bridau? No, no! The
unmounted grenadiers of the Guard can not draw back before the dragoons
of the Guard. Arrange your business in some other way and be there!”

“One more to send to the shades!” said Max. “Well, I think I can manage
my business so as to get there--For,” he thought to himself, “that power
of attorney ought not to be in my name; as old Heron says, it would look
too much like theft.”

This lion, tangled in the meshes Philippe Bridau was weaving for him,
muttered between his teeth as he went along; he avoided the looks of
those he met and returned home by the boulevard Vilatte, still talking
to himself.

“I will have that money before I fight,” he said. “If I die, it shall
not go to Philippe. I must put it in Flore’s name. She will follow my
instructions, and go straight to Paris. Once there, she can marry, if
she chooses, the son of some marshal of France who has been sent to the
right-about. I’ll have that power of attorney made in Baruch’s name, and
he’ll transfer the property by my order.”

Max, to do him justice, was never more cool and calm in appearance
than when his blood and his ideas were boiling. No man ever united in
a higher degree the qualities which make a great general. If his career
had not been cut short by his captivity at Cabrera, the Emperor would
certainly have found him one of those men who are necessary to the
success of vast enterprises. When he entered the room where the hapless
victim of all these comic and tragic scenes was still weeping, Max asked
the meaning of such distress; seemed surprised, pretended that he knew
nothing, and heard, with well-acted amazement, of Flore’s departure.
He questioned Kouski, to obtain some light on the object of this
inexplicable journey.

“Madame said like this,” Kouski replied, “--that I was to tell monsieur
she had taken twenty thousand francs in gold from his drawer, thinking
that monsieur wouldn’t refuse her that amount as wages for the last
twenty-two years.”

“Wages?” exclaimed Rouget.

“Yes,” replied Kouski. “Ah! I shall never come back,” she said to
Vedie as she drove away. “Poor Vedie, who is so attached to monsieur,
remonstrated with madame. ‘No, no,’ she answered, ‘he has no affection
for me; he lets his nephew treat me like the lowest of the low’; and she
wept--oh! bitterly.”

“Eh! what do I care for Philippe?” cried the old man, whom Max was
watching. “Where is Flore? how can we find out where she is?”

“Philippe, whose advice you follow, will help you,” said Max coldly.

“Philippe?” said the old man, “what has he to do with the poor child?
There is no one but you, my good Max, who can find Flore. She will
follow you--you could bring her back to me--”

“I don’t wish to oppose Monsieur Bridau,” observed Max.

“As for that,” cried Rouget, “if that hinders you, he told me he meant
to kill you.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Gilet, laughing, “we will see about it!”

“My friend,” said the old man, “find Flore, and I will do all she wants
of me.”

“Some one must have seen her as she passed through the town,” said
Maxence to Kouski. “Serve dinner; put everything on the table, and then
go and make inquiries from place to place. Let us know, by dessert,
which road Mademoiselle Brazier has taken.”

This order quieted for a time the poor creature, who was moaning like
a child that has lost its nurse. At this moment Rouget, who hated Max,
thought his tormentor an angel. A passion like that of this miserable
old man for Flore is astonishingly like the emotions of childhood. At
six o’clock, the Pole, who had merely taken a walk, returned to announce
that Flore had driven towards Vatan.

“Madame is going back to her own people, that’s plain,” said Kouski.

“Would you like to go to Vatan to-night?” said Max. “The road is
bad, but Kouski knows how to drive, and you’ll make your peace better
to-night than to-morrow morning.”

“Let us go!” cried Rouget.

“Put the horse in quietly,” said Max to Kouski; “manage, if you can,
that the town shall not know of this nonsense, for Monsieur Rouget’s
sake. Saddle my horse,” he added in a whisper. “I will ride on ahead of
you.”

Monsieur Hochon had already notified Philippe of Flore’s departure; and
the colonel rose from Monsieur Mignonnet’s dinner-table to rush to the
place Saint-Jean; for he at once guessed the meaning of this clever
strategy. When Philippe presented himself at his uncle’s house, Kouski
answered through a window that Monsieur Rouget was unable to see any
one.

“Fario,” said Philippe to the Spaniard, who was stationed in the
Grande-Narette, “go and tell Benjamin to mount his horse; it is
all-important that I shall know what Gilet does with my uncle.”

“They are now putting the horse into the caleche,” said Fario, who had
been watching the Rouget stable.

“If they go towards Vatan,” answered Philippe, “get me another horse,
and come yourself with Benjamin to Monsieur Mignonnet’s.”

“What do you mean to do?” asked Monsieur Hochon, who had come out of his
own house when he saw Philippe and Fario standing together.

“The genius of a general, my dear Monsieur Hochon,” said Philippe,
“consists not only in carefully observing the enemy’s movements, but
also in guessing his intentions from those movements, and in modifying
his own plan whenever the enemy interferes with it by some unexpected
action. Now, if my uncle and Max drive out together, they are going
to Vatan; Maxence will have promised to reconcile him with Flore, who
‘fugit ad salices,’--the manoeuvre is General Virgil’s. If that’s the
line they take, I don’t yet know what I shall do; I shall have some
hours to think it over, for my uncle can’t sign a power of attorney at
ten o’clock at night; the notaries will all be in bed. If, as I
rather fancy, Max goes on in advance of my uncle to teach Flore her
lesson,--which seems necessary and probable,--the rogue is lost! you
will see the sort of revenge we old soldiers take in a game of this
kind. Now, as I need a helper for this last stroke, I must go back to
Mignonnet’s and make an arrangement with my friend Carpentier.”

Shaking hands with Monsieur Hochon, Philippe went off down the
Petite-Narette to Mignonnet’s house. Ten minutes later, Monsieur Hochon
saw Max ride off at a quick trot; and the old miser’s curiosity was
so powerfully excited that he remained standing at his window, eagerly
expecting to hear the wheels of the old demi-fortune, which was not long
in coming. Jean-Jacques’s impatience made him follow Max within twenty
minutes. Kouski, no doubt under orders from his master, walked the horse
through the town.

“If they get to Paris, all is lost,” thought Monsieur Hochon.

At this moment, a lad from the faubourg de Rome came to the Hochon house
with a letter for Baruch. The two grandsons, much subdued by the events
of the morning, had kept their rooms of their own accord during the day.
Thinking over their prospects, they saw plainly that they had better be
cautious with their grandparents. Baruch knew very well the influence
which his grandfather Hochon exerted over his grandfather and
grandmother Borniche: Monsieur Hochon would not hesitate to get their
property for Adolphine if his conduct were such as to make them pin
their hopes on the grand marriage with which his grandfather had
threatened him that morning. Being richer than Francois, Baruch had the
most to lose; he therefore counselled an absolute surrender, with no
other condition than the payment of their debt to Max. As for Francois,
his future was entirely in the hands of his grandfather; he had no
expectations except from him, and by the guardianship account, he was
now his debtor. The two young men accordingly gave solemn promises
of amendment, prompted by their imperilled interests, and by the hope
Madame Hochon held out, that the debt to Max should be paid.

“You have done very wrong,” she said to them; “repair it by future good
conduct, and Monsieur Hochon will forget it.”

So, when Francois had read the letter which had been brought for Baruch,
over the latter’s shoulder, he whispered in his ear, “Ask grandpapa’s
advice.”

“Read this,” said Baruch, taking the letter to old Hochon.

“Read it to me yourself; I haven’t my spectacles.”

  My dear Friend,--I hope you will not hesitate, under the serious
  circumstances in which I find myself, to do me the service of
  receiving a power of attorney from Monsieur Rouget. Be at Vatan
  to-morrow morning at nine o’clock. I shall probably send you to
  Paris, but don’t be uneasy; I will furnish you with money for the
  journey, and join you there immediately. I am almost sure I shall
  be obliged to leave Issoudun, December third.

  Adieu. I count on your friendship; rely on that of your friend,

  Maxence


“God be praised!” exclaimed Monsieur Hochon; “the property of that old
idiot is saved from the claws of the devil.”

“It will be if you say so,” said Madame Hochon; “and I thank God,--who
has no doubt heard my prayers. The prosperity of the wicked is always
fleeting.”

“You must go to Vatan, and accept the power of attorney from Monsieur
Rouget,” said the old man to Baruch. “Their object is to get fifty
thousand francs a year transferred to Mademoiselle Brazier. They will
send you to Paris, and you must seem to go; but you are to stop at
Orleans, and wait there till you hear from me. Let no one--not a
soul--know where you lodge; go to the first inn you come to in the
faubourg Bannier, no matter if it is only a post-house--”

“Look here!” cried Francois, who had rushed to the window at the sudden
noise of wheels in the Grande-Narette. “Here’s something new!--Pere
Rouget and Colonel Bridau coming back together in the caleche, Benjamin
and Captain Carpentier following on horseback!”

“I’ll go over,” cried Monsieur Hochon, whose curiosity carried the day
over every other feeling.

Monsieur Hochon found old Rouget in his bedroom, writing the following
letter at his nephew’s dictation:

  Mademoiselle,--If you do not start to return here the moment you
  receive this letter, your conduct will show such ingratitude for
  all my goodness that I shall revoke the will I have made in your
  favor, and give my property to my nephew Philippe. You will
  understand that Monsieur Gilet can no longer be my guest after
  staying with you at Vatan. I send this letter by Captain
  Carpentier, who will put it into your own hands. I hope you will
  listen to his advice; he will speak to you with authority from me.
  Your affectionate

  J.-J. Rouget.


“Captain Carpentier and I MET my uncle, who was so foolish as to follow
Mademoiselle Brazier and Monsieur Gilet to Vatan,” said Philippe, with
sarcastic emphasis, to Monsieur Hochon. “I have made my uncle see that
he was running his head into a noose; for that girl will abandon him the
moment she gets him to sign a power of attorney, by which they mean to
obtain the income of his money in the Funds. That letter will bring
her back under his roof, the handsome runaway! this very night, or I’m
mistaken. I promise to make her as pliable as a bit of whalebone for the
rest of her days, if my uncle allows me to take Maxence Gilet’s place;
which, in my opinion, he ought never to have had in the first place. Am
I not right?--and yet here’s my uncle bemoaning himself!”

“Neighbor,” said Monsieur Hochon, “you have taken the best means to get
peace in your household. Destroy your will, and Flore will be once more
what she used to be in the early days.”

“No, she will never forgive me for what I have made her suffer,”
whimpered the old man; “she will no longer love me.”

“She shall love you, and closely too; I’ll take care of that,” said
Philippe.

“Come, open your eyes!” exclaimed Monsieur Hochon. “They mean to rob you
and abandon you.”

“Oh! I was sure of it!” cried the poor imbecile.

“See, here is a letter Maxence has written to my grandson Borniche,”
said old Hochon. “Read it.”

“What infamy!” exclaimed Carpentier, as he listened to the letter, which
Rouget read aloud, weeping.

“Is that plain enough, uncle?” demanded Philippe. “Hold that hussy by
her interests and she’ll adore you as you deserve.”

“She loves Maxence too well; she will leave me,” cried the frightened
old man.

“But, uncle, Maxence or I,--one or the other of us--won’t leave our
footsteps in the dust of Issoudun three days hence.”

“Well then go, Monsieur Carpentier,” said Rouget; “if you promise me to
bring her back, go! You are a good man; say to her in my name all you
think you ought to say.”

“Captain Carpentier will whisper in her ear that I have sent to Paris
for a woman whose youth and beauty are captivating; that will bring the
jade back in a hurry!”

The captain departed, driving himself in the old caleche; Benjamin
accompanied him on horseback, for Kouski was nowhere to be found. Though
threatened by the officers with arrest and the loss of his situation,
the Pole had gone to Vatan on a hired horse, to warn Max and Flore of
the adversary’s move. After fulfilling his mission, Carpentier, who did
not wish to drive back with Flore, was to change places with Benjamin,
and take the latter’s horse.

When Philippe was told of Kouski’s flight he said to Benjamin, “You will
take the Pole’s place, from this time on. It is all mapping out, papa
Hochon!” cried the lieutenant-colonel. “That banquet will be jovial!”

“You will come and live here, of course,” said the old miser.

“I have told Fario to send me all my things,” answered Philippe. “I
shall sleep in the room adjoining Gilet’s apartment,--if my uncle
consents.”

“What will come of all this?” cried the terrified old man.

“Mademoiselle Flore Brazier is coming, gentle as a paschal lamb,”
replied Monsieur Hochon.

“God grant it!” exclaimed Rouget, wiping his eyes.

“It is now seven o’clock,” said Philippe; “the sovereign of your heart
will be here at half-past eleven: you’ll never see Gilet again, and you
will be as happy ever after as a pope.--If you want me to succeed,” he
whispered to Monsieur Hochon, “stay here till the hussy comes; you can
help me in keeping the old man up to his resolution; and, together,
we’ll make that crab-girl see on which side her bread is buttered.”

Monsieur Hochon felt the reasonableness of the request and stayed:
but they had their hands full, for old Rouget gave way to childish
lamentations, which were only quieted by Philippe’s repeating over and
over a dozen times:--

“Uncle, you will see that I am right when Flore returns to you as tender
as ever. You shall be petted; you will save your property: be guided by
my advice, and you’ll live in paradise for the rest of your days.”

When, about half-past eleven, wheels were heard in the Grande-Narette,
the question was, whether the carriage were returning full or empty.
Rouget’s face wore an expression of agony, which changed to the
prostration of excessive joy when he saw the two women, as the carriage
turned to enter the courtyard.

“Kouski,” said Philippe, giving a hand to Flore to help her down. “You
are no longer in Monsieur Rouget’s service. You will not sleep here
to-night; get your things together, and go. Benjamin takes your place.”

“Are you the master here?” said Flore sarcastically.

“With your permission,” replied Philippe, squeezing her hand as if in a
vice. “Come! we must have an understanding, you and I”; and he led the
bewildered woman out into the place Saint-Jean.

“My fine lady,” began the old campaigner, stretching out his right hand,
“three days hence, Maxence Gilet will be sent to the shades by that arm,
or his will have taken me off guard. If I die, you will be the mistress
of my poor imbecile uncle; ‘bene sit.’ If I remain on my pins, you’ll
have to walk straight, and keep him supplied with first-class happiness.
If you don’t, I know girls in Paris who are, with all due respect, much
prettier than you; for they are only seventeen years old: they would
make my uncle excessively happy, and they are in my interests. Begin
your attentions this very evening; if the old man is not as gay as a
lark to-morrow morning, I have only a word to say to you; it is this,
pay attention to it,--there is but one way to kill a man without the
interference of the law, and that is to fight a duel with him; but I
know three ways to get rid of a woman: mind that, my beauty!”

During this address, Flore shook like a person with the ague.

“Kill Max--?” she said, gazing at Philippe in the moonlight.

“Come, here’s my uncle.”

Old Rouget, turning a deaf ear to Monsieur Hochon’s remonstrances, now
came out into the street, and took Flore by the hand, as a miser might
have grasped his treasure; he drew her back to the house and into his
own room and shut the door.

“This is Saint-Lambert’s day, and he who deserts his place, loses it,”
remarked Benjamin to the Pole.

“My master will shut your mouth for you,” answered Kouski, departing to
join Max who established himself at the hotel de la Poste.

On the morrow, between nine and eleven o’clock, all the women talked
to each other from door to door throughout the town. The story of the
wonderful change in the Rouget household spread everywhere. The upshot
of the conversations was the same on all sides,--

“What will happen at the banquet between Max and Colonel Bridau?”

Philippe said but few words to the Vedie,--“Six hundred francs’ annuity,
or dismissal.” They were enough, however, to keep her neutral, for a
time, between the two great powers, Philippe and Flore.

Knowing Max’s life to be in danger, Flore became more affectionate
to Rouget than in the first days of their alliance. Alas! in love, a
self-interested devotion is sometimes more agreeable than a truthful
one; and that is why many men pay so much for clever deceivers. The
Rabouilleuse did not appear till the next morning, when she came down to
breakfast with Rouget on her arm. Tears filled her eyes as she beheld,
sitting in Max’s place, the terrible adversary, with his sombre blue
eyes, and the cold, sinister expression on his face.

“What is the matter, mademoiselle?” he said, after wishing his uncle
good-morning.

“She can’t endure the idea of your fighting Maxence,” said old Rouget.

“I have not the slightest desire to kill Gilet,” answered Philippe. “He
need only take himself off from Issoudun and go to America on a venture.
I should be the first to advise you to give him an outfit, and to wish
him a safe voyage. He would soon make a fortune there, and that is far
more honorable than turning Issoudun topsy-turvy at night, and playing
the devil in your household.”

“Well, that’s fair enough,” said Rouget, glancing at Flore.

“A-mer-i-ca!” she ejaculated, sobbing.

“It is better to kick his legs about in a free country than have them
rot in a pine box in France. However, perhaps you think he is a good
shot, and can kill me; it’s on the cards,” observed the colonel.

“Will you let me speak to him?” said Flore, imploring Philippe in a
humble and submissive tone.

“Certainly; he can come here and pack up his things. I will stay with
my uncle during that time; for I shall not leave the old man again,”
replied Philippe.

“Vedie,” cried Flore, “run to the hotel, and tell Monsieur Gilet that I
beg him--”

“--to come and get his belongings,” said Philippe, interrupting Flore’s
message.

“Yes, yes, Vedie; that will be a good pretext to see me; I must speak to
him.”

Terror controlled her hatred; and the shock which her whole being
experienced when she first encountered this strong and pitiless nature
was now so overwhelming that she bowed before Philippe just as Rouget
had been in the habit of bending before her. She anxiously awaited
Vedie’s return. The woman brought a formal refusal from Max, who
requested Mademoiselle Brazier to send his things to the hotel de la
Poste.

“Will you allow me to take them to him?” she said to Jean-Jacques
Rouget.

“Yes, but will you come back?” said the old man.

“If Mademoiselle is not back by midday, you will give me a power of
attorney to attend to your property,” said Philippe, looking at Flore.
“Take Vedie with you, to save appearances, mademoiselle. In future you
are to think of my uncle’s honor.”

Flore could get nothing out of Max. Desperate at having allowed himself,
before the eyes of the whole town, to be routed out of his shameless
position, Gilet was too proud to run away from Philippe. The
Rabouilleuse combated this objection, and proposed that they should fly
together to America; but Max, who did not want Flore without her money,
and yet did not wish the girl to see the bottom of his heart, insisted
on his intention of killing Philippe.

“We have committed a monstrous folly,” he said. “We ought all three to
have gone to Paris and spent the winter there; but how could one guess,
from the mere sight of that fellow’s big carcass, that things would turn
out as they have? The turn of events is enough to make one giddy! I took
the colonel for one of those fire-eaters who haven’t two ideas in their
head; that was the blunder I made. As I didn’t have the sense to double
like a hare in the beginning, I’ll not be such a coward as to back down
before him. He has lowered me in the estimation of this town, and I
cannot get back what I have lost unless I kill him.”

“Go to America with forty thousand francs. I’ll find a way to get rid of
that scoundrel, and join you. It would be much wiser.”

“What would people say of me?” he exclaimed. “No; I have buried nine
already. The fellow doesn’t seem as if he knew much; he went from school
to the army, and there he was always fighting till 1815; then he went
to America, and I doubt if the brute ever set foot in a fencing-alley;
while I have no match with the sabre. The sabre is his arm; I shall seem
very generous in offering it to him,--for I mean, if possible, to let
him insult me,--and I can easily run him through. Unquestionably, it is
my wisest course. Don’t be uneasy; we shall be masters of the field in a
couple of days.”

That it was that a stupid point of honor had more influence over Max
than sound policy. When Flore got home she shut herself up to cry at
ease. During the whole of that day gossip ran wild in Issoudun, and the
duel between Philippe and Maxence was considered inevitable.

“Ah! Monsieur Hochon,” said Mignonnet, who, accompanied by Carpentier,
met the old man on the boulevard Baron, “we are very uneasy; for Gilet
is clever with all weapons.”

“Never mind,” said the old provincial diplomatist; “Philippe has managed
this thing well from the beginning. I should never have thought that
big, easy-going fellow would have succeeded as he has. The two have
rolled together like a couple of thunder-clouds.”

“Oh!” said Carpentier, “Philippe is a remarkable man. His conduct before
the Court of Peers was a masterpiece of diplomacy.”

“Well, Captain Renard,” said one of the townsfolk to Max’s friend. “They
say wolves don’t devour each other, but it seems that Max is going
to set his teeth in Colonel Bridau. That’s pretty serious among you
gentlemen of the Old Guard.”

“You make fun of it, do you? Because the poor fellow amused himself a
little at night, you are all against him,” said Potel. “But Gilet is a
man who couldn’t stay in a hole like Issoudun without finding something
to do.”

“Well, gentlemen,” remarked another, “Max and the colonel must play out
their game. Bridau had to avenge his brother. Don’t you remember Max’s
treachery to the poor lad?”

“Bah! nothing but an artist,” said Renard.

“But the real question is about the old man’s property,” said a third.
“They say Monsieur Gilet was laying hands on fifty thousand francs a
year, when the colonel turned him out of his uncle’s house.”

“Gilet rob a man! Come, don’t say that to any one but me, Monsieur
Canivet,” cried Potel. “If you do, I’ll make you swallow your
tongue,--and without any sauce.”

Every household in town offered prayers for the honorable Colonel
Bridau.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XVI

Towards four o’clock the following day, the officers of the old army at Issoudun and its environs were sauntering about the place du Marché, in front of an eating-house kept by a man named Lacroix, waiting the arrival of Colonel Philippe Bridau. The banquet in honor of the coronation was to begin at five o’clock. Various groups discussed Max’s discomfiture and his dismissal from old Rouget’s house; the officers were to dine at Lacroix’s, and the common soldiers had resolved on a meeting at a neighboring wine-shop. Among the officers, Potel and Renard alone defended Max.

“Is it any of our business what takes place among the old man’s heirs?” said Renard.

“Max is weak with women,” remarked the cynical Potel.

“There’ll be sabres unsheathed before long,” said an old sub-lieutenant who cultivated a kitchen-garden in the upper Baltan. “If Monsieur Maxence Gilet committed the folly of going to live under old Rouget’s roof, he would be a coward if he allowed himself to be turned off like a valet without asking why.”

“Of course,” said Mignonnet dryly. “A folly that doesn’t succeed becomes a crime.”

At this moment Max joined the old soldiers of Napoleon, and was received in significant silence. Potel and Renard each took an arm of their friend and walked with him, conversing. Presently Philippe approached in full dress; he trailed his cane with an air which contrasted with the forced attention Max paid his two supporters. Bridau’s hand was grasped by Mignonnet, Carpentier, and several others. This welcome, so different from that accorded Max, dispelled the last feeling of cowardice, or, if you prefer it, wisdom, which Flore’s entreaties, and above all her tendernesses, had awakened in him.

“We shall fight,” he said to Renard, “and to the death. Therefore don’t talk to me any more; let me play my part well.”

After these words, spoken in a feverish tone, the three Bonapartists returned to the group of officers and mixed among them. Max bowed first to Bridau, who returned the bow; the two exchanged a frigid glance.

“Come, gentlemen, let us take our seats,” said Potel.

“And drink to the health of the Little Corporal, who is now in the paradise of heroes,” cried Renard.

The company poured into the long, low dining-hall of Lacroix’s restaurant, the windows opening on the market-place. Each guest took his place at the table where, at Philippe’s request, the two adversaries were seated directly opposite each other. Some young men of the town, among them several Knights of Idleness, anxious to know what might happen at the banquet, walked about the street and discussed the critical position into which Philippe had forced Max. They deplored the crisis, though each considered the duel inevitable.

Everything went off well until the dessert, though the two antagonists displayed, despite apparent joviality, a vigilance resembling disquietude. While awaiting the quarrel both were planning, Philippe showed admirable coolness and Max a distracting gayety; but to an observer each was playing a part.

When the dessert was served Philippe rose and said: “Fill your glasses, my friends! I ask permission to propose the first toast.”

“He said my friends, don’t fill your glass,” whispered Renard to Max.

Max poured out some wine.

“To the Grand Army!” cried Philippe, with genuine enthusiasm.

“To the Grand Army!” repeated every voice.

At this moment eleven private soldiers, among them Benjamin and Kouski, appeared at the door and repeated the toast, “To the Grand Army!”

“Come in, my sons; we are going to drink His health.”

The old soldiers came in and stood behind the officers.

“You see He is not dead!” said Kouski to an old sergeant, who had perhaps been grieving that the Emperor’s agony was over.

“I claim the second toast,” said Mignonnet, rising. “Let us drink to those who attempted to restore his son!”

Everyone present, except Maxence Gilet, bowed to Philippe Bridau and stretched their glasses towards him.

“One word,” said Max, rising.

“It is Max! it is Max!” cried voices outside; then a deep silence reigned in the room and street, for Gilet’s known character made everyone expect a taunt.

“May we all meet again at this time next year,” said Max, bowing ironically to Philippe.

“It’s coming!” whispered Kouski to his neighbor.

“The Paris police would never allow a banquet of this kind,” said Potel to Philippe.

“Why the devil mention the police to Colonel Bridau?” said Maxence insolently.

“Captain Potel—he—meant no insult,” said Philippe, smiling coldly. The stillness was so profound that the buzzing of a fly could have been heard.

“The police were sufficiently afraid of me,” resumed Philippe, “to send me to Issoudun,—a place where I have had the pleasure of meeting old comrades, but where, it must be owned, there is a dearth of amusement. For a man who doesn’t despise folly, I’m rather restricted. However, it is economical, for I am not one of those to whom feather-beds give incomes; Mariette of the Grand Opera cost me fabulous sums.”

“Is that remark meant for me, my dear colonel?” asked Max, sending a glance at Philippe like a current of electricity.

“Take it as you please,” answered Bridau.

“Colonel, my two friends here, Renard and Potel, will call to-morrow on—”

“—on Mignonnet and Carpentier,” answered Philippe, cutting short Max’s sentence and motioning to his two neighbors.

“Now,” said Max, “let us go on with the toasts.”

The two adversaries had not raised their voices above ordinary conversation; there was nothing solemn in the affair except the dead silence in which it took place.

“Look here, you others!” cried Philippe, addressing the soldiers behind the officers; “remember that our affairs don’t concern the bourgeoisie—no word, therefore, on what goes on here. It is for the Old Guard only.”

“They’ll obey orders, colonel,” said Renard. “I’ll answer for them.”

“Long live His little one! May he reign over France!” cried Potel.

“Death to Englishmen!” cried Carpentier.

That toast was received with prodigious applause.

“Shame on Hudson Lowe,” said Captain Renard.

The dessert passed off well; the libations were plentiful. The antagonists and their four seconds were careful that a duel involving so large a fortune, and the reputation of two men noted for courage, should not appear the result of an ordinary squabble. No two gentlemen could have behaved better than Philippe and Max; in this respect the anxious waiting of the young men and townspeople about the market-place was balked. All the guests, like true soldiers, kept silence as to the episode at dessert. At ten o’clock that night the two adversaries were informed that the sabre was the agreed weapon; the rendezvous was behind the chancel of the Capuchins’ church at eight o’clock next morning. Goddet, who had been at the banquet as former army surgeon, was requested to be present. The seconds agreed that, no matter what happened, the combat should last only ten minutes.

At eleven o’clock that night, to Colonel Bridau’s amazement, Monsieur Hochon appeared at his rooms just as he was going to bed, escorting Madame Hochon.

“We know what has happened,” said the old lady, with tearful eyes, “and I have come to entreat you not to leave the house to-morrow morning without saying your prayers. Lift your soul to God!”

“Yes, madame,” said Philippe, to whom old Hochon made a sign from behind his wife’s back.

“That is not all,” said Agathe’s godmother. “I stand in the place of your poor mother, and I divest myself, for you, of a thing I hold most precious—here,” she went on, holding towards Philippe a tooth fastened on black velvet embroidered in gold, with a pair of green strings. Having shown it, she replaced it in a little bag. “It is a relic of Sainte Solange, the patron saint of Berry,” she said, “I saved it during the Revolution; wear it on your breast to-morrow.”

“Will it protect me from a sabre-thrust?” asked Philippe.

“Yes,” replied the old lady.

“Then I have no right to wear that accoutrement any more than if it were a cuirass,” cried Agathe’s son.

“What does he mean?” said Madame Hochon.

“He says it is not playing fair,” answered Hochon.

“Then we will say no more about it,” said the old lady, “I shall pray for you.”

“Well, madame, prayer—and a good point—can do no harm,” said Philippe, making a thrust as if to pierce Monsieur Hochon’s heart.

The old lady kissed the colonel on his forehead. As she left, she gave thirty francs— all the money she possessed—to Benjamin, requesting him to sew the relic into his master’s trousers pocket. Benjamin did so—not because he believed in the tooth’s virtue, for he said his master had a much better talisman against Gilet, but because his conscience constrained him to fulfil a commission for which he’d been so liberally paid. Madame Hochon went home full of confidence in Sainte Solange.

At eight o’clock next morning, December third, the weather cloudy, Max, accompanied by his seconds and the Pole, arrived on the little meadow surrounding the apse of the Capuchins’ church. There he found Philippe and his seconds, with Benjamin, waiting. Potel and Mignonnet paced off twenty-four feet; at each extremity the attendants drew a line on the earth with a spade: the combatants were not allowed to retreat beyond that line on pain of being thought cowardly. Each was to stand at his line and advance as he pleased when the seconds gave the word.

“Do we take off our coats?” asked Philippe coldly.

“Of course,” answered Maxence, assuming the manner of a bully.

They did so; the rosy tints of their skin appearing through their shirts. Each, armed with a cavalry sabre of equal weight, about three pounds, and equal length, three feet, placed himself at his line, the point of his weapon on the ground, awaiting the signal. Both were so calm that, despite the cold, their muscles quivered no more than if they had been made of iron. Goddet, the four seconds, and the two soldiers felt an involuntary admiration.

“They are a proud pair!” exclaimed Potel.

Just as the signal was given, Max caught sight of Fario’s sinister face looking at them through a hole the Knights of Idleness had made for pigeons in the church roof. Those eyes, which sent forth streams of fire, hatred, and revenge, dazzled Max for a moment. The colonel went straight to his adversary and put himself on guard in a way that gained him an advantage. Experts know that, of two antagonists, the abler takes the “inside of the pavement”—a guard that plainly marks a duellist of the first rank; a feeling of inferiority entered Max’s soul, producing the same disarray that demoralizes a gambler in presence of a master.

“Ah! the lascar!” thought Max, “he’s an expert; I’m lost!”

He attempted a “moulinet,” twirling his sabre with single-stick dexterity. He wanted to bewilder Philippe and disarm him; but at the first encounter he felt that the colonel’s wrist was iron with the flexibility of a spring. Maxence was forced, unfortunate fellow, to think of another move, while Philippe, whose eyes darted gleams sharper than the flash of their blades, parried every attack with the coolness of a fencing-master wearing his plastron in an armory.

Between two men of this calibre, a phenomenon occurs like that in the class tussle called “the savante,” fought with the feet. Victory depends on a false movement, an error of calculation rapid as lightning, almost instinctive. During a period that seems short to spectators and long to the combatants, the contest is one of observation so keen as to absorb mind and body, yet concealed by feints whose slowness seems to show no intention to fight. This moment, followed by a rapid decisive struggle, is terrible to a connoisseur. At a bad parry from Max the colonel sent the sabre spinning from his hand.

“Pick it up,” he said, pausing; “I am not the man to kill a disarmed enemy.”

There was something atrocious in the grandeur of these words; they seemed to show such consciousness of superiority that the onlookers took them for calculation. In fact, when Max replaced himself in position, he had lost his coolness and was once more confronted with his adversary’s raised guard which defended the colonel’s person while menacing his. He resolved to redeem his shameful defeat by a bold stroke. He no longer guarded himself, but took his sabre in both hands and rushed furiously on his antagonist, resolved to kill him if he had to lose his own life. Philippe received a cut which slashed open his forehead and part of his face, but he cleft Max’s head obliquely by the terrible sweep of a “moulinet” made to break the force of Max’s annihilating stroke. These two savage blows ended the combat, at the ninth minute. Fario came down to gloat over the sight of his enemy in the convulsions of death; for the muscles of a man of Maxence Gilet’s vigor quiver horribly. Philippe was carried back to his uncle’s house.

Thus perished a man destined to do great deeds had he lived amid environments suited to him; a man treated by Nature as a favorite child, for she gave him courage, self-possession, and the political sagacity of a Cesar Borgia. But education had not bestowed upon him that nobility of conduct and ideas without which nothing great is possible. He was not regretted, because of the perfidy with which his adversary, who was a worse man than he, had contrived to bring him into disrepute. His death put an end to the exploits of the Order of Idleness, much to the satisfaction of Issoudun. Philippe therefore had nothing to fear in consequence of the duel, which seemed almost the result of divine vengeance: its circumstances were related throughout the region with unanimous praise for the bravery of the two combatants.

“But they had better both have been killed,” remarked Monsieur Mouilleron; “it would have been a good riddance for the Government.”

The situation of Flore Brazier would have been very embarrassing were it not for the condition into which she was thrown by Max’s death. A brain-fever set in, combined with a dangerous inflammation resulting from her escapade to Vatan. If she had had her usual health, she might have fled the house where, in the room above her, Max’s bed lay and his murderer suffered. She hovered between life and death for three months, attended by Monsieur Goddet, who was also attending Philippe.

As soon as Philippe could hold a pen, he wrote the following letters:—

To Monsieur Desroches:

I have already killed the most venomous of the two reptiles; not however without getting my own head split open by a sabre; but the rascal struck with a dying hand. The other viper is here, and I must come to an understanding with her, for my uncle clings to her like the apple of his eye. I have been half afraid the girl, who is devilishly handsome, might run away, and then my uncle would have followed her; but an illness which seized her suddenly has kept her in bed. If God desired to protect me, he would call her soul to himself now, while she is repenting of her sins. Meantime, on my side I have, thanks to that old trump Hochon, the doctor of Issoudun, one named Goddet, a worthy soul who conceives that the property of uncles ought to go to nephews rather than to sluts.

Monsieur Hochon has some influence on a certain papa Fichet, who is rich, and whose daughter Goddet wants as a wife for his son: so the thousand francs they have promised him if he mends up my pate is not the chief cause of his devotion. Moreover, this Goddet, who was formerly head-surgeon to the 3rd regiment of the line, has been privately advised by my staunch friends, Mignonnet and Carpentier; so he is now playing the hypocrite with his other patient. He says to Mademoiselle Brazier, as he feels her pulse, “You see, my child, that there’s a God after all. You have been the cause of a great misfortune, and you must now repair it. The finger of God is in all this (it is inconceivable what they don’t say the finger of God is in!). Religion is religion: submit, resign yourself, and that will quiet you better than my drugs. Above all, resolve to stay here and take care of your master: forget and forgive,—that’s Christianity.”

Goddet has promised to keep the Rabouilleuse three months in her bed. By degrees the girl will get accustomed to living under the same roof with me. I have bought over the cook. That abominable old woman tells her mistress Max would have led her a hard life and declares she overheard him say that if, after the old man’s death, he was obliged to marry Flore, he didn’t mean to have his prospects ruined by it, and he should find a way to get rid of her.

Thus, all goes well so far. My uncle, by old Hochon’s advice, has destroyed his will.

To Monsieur Giroudeau, care of Mademoiselle Florentine. Rue de Vendôme, Marais:

My dear old Fellow,—Find out if the little rat Cesarine has any engagement, and if not, try to arrange that she can come to Issoudun in case I send for her; if I do, she must come at once. It is a matter this time of decent behavior; no theatre morals. She must present herself as the daughter of a brave soldier, killed on the battle-field. Therefore, mind—sober manners, schoolgirl’s clothes, virtue of the best quality; that’s the watchword. If I need Cesarine, and if she answers my purpose, I will give her fifty thousand francs on my uncle’s death. If Cesarine has other engagements, explain what I want to Florentine; and between you, find me some ballet-girl capable of playing the part.

I have had my skull cracked in a duel with the fellow who was filching my inheritance, and is now feeding the worms. I’ll tell you all about it some day. Ah! old fellow, the good times are coming back for you and me; we’ll amuse ourselves once more, or we are not the pair we really are. If you can send me five hundred more cartridges I’ll bite them.

Adieu, my old fire-eater. Light your pipe with this letter. Mind, the daughter of the officer is to come from Châteauroux and must seem in need of assistance. I hope, however, that I shall not be driven to such dangerous expedients. Remember me to Mariette and all our friends.

Agathe, informed by Madame Hochon of what had happened, rushed to Issoudun and was received by her brother, who gave her Philippe’s former room. The poor mother’s tenderness for the worthless son revived in all its maternal strength; a few happy days were hers at last as she listened to the praises the whole town lavished on her hero.

“After all, my child,” said Madame Hochon on the day of her arrival, “youth must have its fling. The dissipations of a soldier under the Empire must, of course, be greater than those of young men looked after by their fathers. Oh! if you only knew what went on here at night under that wretched Max! Thanks to your son, Issoudun now breathes and sleeps in peace. Philippe has come to his senses rather late; he told us frankly that those three months in the Luxembourg sobered him. Monsieur Hochon is delighted with his conduct here; everyone thinks highly of it. If he can be kept away from the temptations of Paris, he will end by being a comfort to you.”

Hearing these consolatory words Agathe’s eyes filled with tears.

Philippe played the saint to his mother, for he had need of her. That wily politician did not wish to have recourse to Cesarine unless he continued to be an object of horror to Mademoiselle Brazier. He saw that Flore had been thoroughly broken to harness by Max; he knew she was an essential part of his uncle’s life, and he preferred to use her rather than send for a ballet-girl who might take it into her head to marry the old man. Fouché advised Louis XVIII. to sleep in Napoleon’s sheets instead of granting the charter; and Philippe would have liked to remain in Gilet’s sheets; but he was reluctant to risk the reputation he had made for himself in Berry. To take Max’s place with the Rabouilleuse would be as odious to him as to her. He could, without discredit and by the laws of nepotism, live in his uncle’s house and at his expense; but he could not have Flore unless her character were whitewashed. Hampered by this difficulty and stimulated by the hope of finally getting hold of the property, the idea came into his head of making his uncle marry the Rabouilleuse. With this in view he requested his mother to go and see the girl and treat her in a sisterly manner.

“I must confess, my dear mother,” he said in a canting tone, looking at Monsieur and Madame Hochon who accompanied her, “that my uncle’s way of life is not becoming; he could, however, make Mademoiselle Brazier respected by the community if he chose. Wouldn’t it be far better for her to be Madame Rouget than the servant-mistress of an old bachelor? She had better obtain a definite right to his property by a marriage contract then threaten a whole family with disinheritance. If you, or Monsieur Hochon, or some good priest would speak of the matter to both parties, you might put a stop to the scandal which offends decent people. Mademoiselle Brazier would be only too happy if you were to welcome her as a sister, and I as an aunt.”

On the morrow Agathe and Madame Hochon appeared at Flore’s bedside and repeated to the sick girl and to Rouget the excellent sentiments expressed by Philippe. Throughout Issoudun the colonel was talked of as a man of noble character, especially because of his conduct towards Flore. For a month, the Rabouilleuse heard Goddet, her doctor, the individual who has paramount influence over a sick person, the respectable Madame Hochon moved by religious principle, and Agathe, so gentle and pious, all representing to her the advantages of a marriage with Rouget. And when, attracted by the idea of becoming Madame Rouget, a dignified and virtuous bourgeois, she grew eager to recover so that the marriage might be celebrated, it was not difficult to make her understand that she would not be allowed to enter the Rouget family if she intended to turn Philippe from its doors.

“Besides,” remarked the doctor, “you really owe him this good fortune. Max would never have allowed you to marry old Rouget. And,” he added in her ear, “if you have children, you can revenge Max, for that will disinherit the Bridaus.”

Two months after the fatal duel, in February 1823, the sick woman, urged by those about her and implored by Rouget, consented to receive Philippe; the sight of his scars made her weep, but his softened and affectionate manner calmed her. By Philippe’s wish they were left alone together.

“My dear child,” said the soldier, “it is I who, from the start, have advised your marriage with my uncle; if you consent, it will take place as soon as you are quite recovered.”

“So they tell me,” she replied.

“Circumstances have compelled me to give you pain; it is natural therefore that I should wish to do you all the good I can. Wealth, respect, and a family position are worth more than what you have lost. You wouldn’t have been that fellow’s wife long after my uncle’s death, for I happen to know, through friends of his, that he intended to get rid of you. Come, my dear, let us understand each other and live happily. You shall be my aunt and nothing more. You will take care that my uncle does not forget me in his will; on my side, you shall see how well I will have you treated in the marriage contract. Keep calm, think it over, and we will talk of it later. All sensible people, indeed the whole town, urge you to put an end to your illegal position; no one will blame you for receiving me. It is well understood in the world that interests go before feelings. By the day of your marriage you will be handsomer than ever. The pallor of illness has given you an air of distinction, and on my honor, if my uncle did not love you so madly, you should be the wife of Colonel Bridau.”

Philippe left the room, having dropped this hint into Flore’s mind to awaken a vague idea of vengeance which might please the girl, who did, in fact, feel a sort of happiness as she saw this dreadful being at her feet. In this scene Philippe repeated, in miniature, that of Richard III. with the queen he had widowed. The meaning is that personal calculation, hidden under sentiment, has a powerful influence on the heart, and is able to dissipate even genuine grief. This is how, in individual life, Nature does that which in works of genius is thought consummate art: she works by self-interest—the genius of money.

At the beginning of April 1823, the hall of Jean-Jacques Rouget’s house was the scene of a splendid dinner given to celebrate the signing of the marriage contract between Mademoiselle Flore Brazier and the old bachelor. The guests were Monsieur Heron, the four witnesses, Messieurs Mignonnet, Carpentier, Hochon, and Goddet, the mayor and the curate, Agathe Bridau, Madame Hochon, and her friend Madame Borniche, the two old ladies who laid down the law to Issoudun society. The bride was much impressed by this concession, obtained by Philippe and intended by the two ladies as a mark of protection to a repentant woman. Flore was in dazzling beauty. The curate, who for the last fortnight had been instructing the ignorant crab-girl, was to allow her, on the following day, to make her first communion. The marriage was the text of this pious article in the “Journal du Cher,” published at Bourges, and in the “Journal de l’Indre,” published at Châteauroux:

Issoudun.—The revival of religion is progressing in Berry. Friends of the Church and all respectable persons in this town were yesterday witnesses of a marriage ceremony by which a leading man of property put an end to a scandalous connection, which began when the authority of religion was overthrown in this region. This event, due to the enlightened zeal of the clergy of Issoudun, will, we trust, have imitators, and put a stop to marriages so-called which have never been solemnized and were only contracted during the disastrous epoch of revolutionary rule.

One remarkable feature of the event to which we allude is that it was brought about at the entreaty of a colonel belonging to the old army, sent to our town by a sentence of the Court of Peers, who may, in consequence, lose the inheritance of his uncle’s property. Such disinterestedness is so rare in these days that it deserves public mention.

By the marriage contract Rouget secured to Flore a dower of one hundred thousand francs and a life annuity of thirty thousand more.

After the wedding, sumptuous, Agathe returned to Paris the happiest of mothers and told Joseph and Desroches what she called the good news.

“Your son Philippe is too wily a man not to keep his paw on that inheritance,” said the lawyer when he had heard Madame Bridau to the end. “You and your poor Joseph will never get one penny of your brother’s property.”

“You, and Joseph too, will always be unjust to that poor boy,” said the mother. “His conduct before the Court of Peers was worthy of a statesman; he succeeded in saving many heads. Philippe’s errors came from his great faculties being unemployed. He now sees how faults of conduct injure the prospects of a man who has his way to make. He is ambitious; that I am sure of; and I am not the only one to predict his future. Monsieur Hochon firmly believes that Philippe has a noble destiny before him.”

“Oh! if he chooses to apply his perverted powers to making his fortune, I have no doubt he will succeed: he is capable of everything; and such fellows go fast and far,” said Desroches.

“Why do you suppose that he will not succeed by honest means?” demanded Madame Bridau.

“You will see!” exclaimed Desroches. “Fortunate or unfortunate, Philippe will remain the man of the Rue Mazarin, the murderer of Madame Descoings, the domestic thief. But don’t worry yourself; he will manage to appear honest to the world.”

After breakfast the morning succeeding the marriage, Philippe took Madame Rouget by the arm when his uncle rose from table and went upstairs to dress—for the pair had come down, one in her morning-robe and the other in his dressing-gown.

“My dear aunt,” said the colonel, leading her into a window recess, “you now belong to the family. Thanks to me, the law has tied the knot. Now, no nonsense. I intend that you and I should play above board. I know the tricks you will try against me; and I shall watch you like a duenna. You will never go out of this house except on my arm; and you will never leave me. As to what passes within the house, damn it, you’ll find me like a spider in the middle of his web. Here is something,” he continued, showing the bewildered woman a letter, “which will prove to you that I could, while you were lying ill upstairs unable to move hand or foot, have turned you out of doors without a penny. Read it.”

He gave her the letter.

My dear Fellow,—Florentine, who has just made her debut at the new Opera House in a “pas de trois” with Mariette and Tullia, is thinking steadily about your affair, and so is Florine,—who has finally given up Lousteau and taken Nathan. That shrewd pair have found you a most delicious little creature—only seventeen, beautiful as an English woman, demure as a “lady,” up to all mischief, sly as Desroches, faithful as Godeschal. Mariette is forming her, so as to give you a fair chance. No woman could hold her own against this little angel, who is a devil under her skin; she can play any part you please—get complete possession of your uncle, or drive him crazy with love. She has that celestial look poor Coralie used to have; she can weep—the tones of her voice will draw a thousand-franc note from a granite heart; and the young mischief soaks up champagne better than any of us. It is a precious discovery; she is under obligations to Mariette and wants to pay them off. After squandering the fortunes of two Englishmen, a Russian, and an Italian prince, Mademoiselle Esther is now in poverty; give her ten thousand francs, that will satisfy her. She has just remarked, laughing, that she has never yet fricasseed a bourgeois, and it will get her hand in. Esther is well known to Finot, Bixiou, and des Lupeaulx, in fact to all our set. Ah! if there were any real fortunes left in France, she would be the greatest courtesan of modern times.

All the editorial staff, Nathan, Finot, Bixiou, etc., are now joking the aforesaid Esther in a magnificent appartement just arranged for Florine by old Lord Dudley (the real father of de Marsay); the lively actress captured him by the dress of her new role. Tullia is with the Duc de Rhetore, Mariette is still with the Duc de Maufrigneuse; between them, they will get your sentence remitted in time for the King’s feast. Bury your uncle under the roses before the Saint-Louis, bring away the property, and spend a little of it with Esther and your old friends, who sign this epistle in a body to remind you of them.

Nathan, Florine, Bixiou, Finot, Mariette,

Florentine, Giroudeau, Tullia

The letter shook in the trembling hands of Madame Rouget and betrayed the terror of her mind and body. The aunt dared not look at the nephew, who fixed his eyes upon her with terrible meaning.

“I trust you,” he said, “as you see; but I expect some return. I have made you my aunt intending to marry you some day. You are worth more to me than Esther in managing my uncle. In a year from now we must be in Paris; the only place where beauty really lives. You will amuse yourself much better there than here; it is a perpetual carnival. I shall return to the army and become a general, and you will be a great lady. There’s our future; now work for it. But I must have a pledge to bind this agreement. You are to give me, within a month from now, a power of attorney from my uncle, which you must obtain under pretence of relieving him of the fatigues of business. Also, a month later, I must have a special power of attorney to transfer the income in the Funds. When that stands in my name, you and I have an equal interest in marrying each other. There it all is, my beautiful aunt, as plain as day. Between you and me there must be no ambiguity. I can marry my aunt at the end of a year’s widowhood; but I could not marry a disgraced girl.”

He left the room without waiting for an answer. When Vedie came in fifteen minutes later to clear the table, she found her mistress pale and moist with perspiration, despite the season. Flore felt like a woman who had fallen to the bottom of a precipice; the future loomed black before her, and on its blackness in the far distance were indistinct monstrous shapes. She felt the damp chill of vaults, instinctive fear of the man crushed her; yet a voice cried in her ear that she deserved to have him for her master. She was helpless against her fate. Flore Brazier had had a room of her own in Rouget’s house; but Madame Rouget belonged to her husband and was now deprived of the free-will of a servant-mistress. In the horrible situation in which she found herself, the hope of having a child came into her mind; but she soon recognized its impossibility. The marriage was to Jean-Jacques what the second marriage of Louis XII. was to that king. The incessant watchfulness of a man like Philippe, who had nothing to do and never quitted his post of observation, made any form of vengeance impossible. Benjamin was his innocent and devoted spy. Vedie trembled before him. Flore felt deserted and utterly helpless. She began to fear death. Without knowing how Philippe might manage to kill her, she felt certain that whenever he suspected her of pregnancy her doom would be sealed. The sound of his voice, the veiled glitter of that gambler’s eye, the slightest movement of the soldier, who treated her with a brutality that was still polite, made her shudder. As to the power of attorney demanded by the ferocious colonel, who in the eyes of all Issoudun was a hero, he had it as soon as he wanted it; for Flore fell under the man’s dominion as France had fallen under Napoleon.

Like a butterfly whose feet are caught in the incandescent wax of a taper, Rouget rapidly dissipated his remaining strength. In presence of that decay, the nephew remained as cold and impassible as the diplomats of 1814 during the convulsions of imperial France.

Philippe, who did not believe in Napoleon II., now wrote the following letter to the minister of war, which Mariette made the Duc de Maufrigneuse convey to that functionary:—

Monseigneur,—Napoleon is no more. I desired to remain faithful to him according to my oath; now I am free to offer my services to His Majesty. If your Excellency deigns to explain my conduct to His Majesty, the King will see that it is in keeping with the laws of honor, if not with those of his government. The King, who thought it proper that his aide-de-camp, General Rapp, should mourn his former master, will no doubt feel indulgently for me. Napoleon was my benefactor.

I therefore entreat your Excellency to take into consideration my request for employment in my proper rank; and I beg to assure you of my entire submission. The King will find in me a faithful subject.

Deign to accept the assurance of respect with which I have the honor to be,
Your Excellency’s very submissive and

Very humble servant,

Philippe Bridau

Formerly chief of squadron in the dragoons of the Guard; officer of the Legion of Honor; now under police surveillance at Issoudun.

To this letter was joined a request for permission to go to Paris on urgent family business; and Monsieur Mouilleron annexed letters from the mayor, the sub-prefect, and the commissary of police at Issoudun, all bestowing praises on Philippe’s conduct and dwelling upon the newspaper article relating to his uncle’s marriage.

Two weeks later, Philippe received the desired permission and a letter in which the minister of war informed him that, by order of the King, he was, as a preliminary favor, reinstated lieutenant-colonel in the royal army.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER XVII

Lieutenant-Colonel Bridau returned to Paris with his aunt and the helpless Rouget, whom he escorted three days after their arrival to the Treasury, where Jean-Jacques signed the transfer of the income, which henceforth became Philippe’s. The exhausted old man and the Rabouilleuse were now plunged by their nephew into the dissipations of actresses, journalists, artists, and equivocal women among whom Philippe had already wasted his youth; old Rouget found excitements that soon after killed him. Instigated by Giroudeau, Lolotte, one of the handsomest of the Opera ballet-girls, was the amiable assassin of the old man. Rouget died after a splendid supper at Florentine’s, and Lolotte threw the blame upon a slice of pâté de foie gras; as the Strasburg masterpiece could make no defence, it was considered settled that the old man died of indigestion.

Madame Rouget was in her element amid this decollete society; but Philippe gave her in charge of Mariette, and that monitress did not allow the widow—whose mourning was diversified with a few amusements—to commit any actual follies.

In October, 1823, Philippe returned to Issoudun, furnished with a power of attorney from his aunt, to liquidate his uncle’s estate; the business was soon over, and he returned to Paris in March, 1824, with sixteen hundred thousand francs—the net proceeds of old Rouget’s property, not counting the precious pictures, which had never left Monsieur Hochon’s hands. Philippe put the whole property into Mongenod and Sons, where young Baruch Borniche was employed, on Hochon’s assurances of solvency and probity. This house took his funds at six per cent per annum, on condition of three months’ notice for withdrawal.

One day Philippe went to see his mother and invited her to his marriage, witnessed by Giroudeau, Finot, Nathan, and Bixiou. By the marriage contract, the widow Rouget, whose portion amounted to a million of francs, secured to her future husband her whole fortune should she die without children. No invitations were sent; Philippe had designs. He lodged his wife in an appartement in the rue Saint-Georges, bought ready-furnished from Lolotte. Madame Bridau the younger thought it delightful; her husband rarely set foot in it. Without her knowledge, Philippe purchased in the rue de Clichy a magnificent hotel for two hundred and fifty thousand francs, paying one hundred and fifty thousand down and taking two years for the rest. He spent large sums altering the interior and furnishing it; in fact, he put his income for two years into this outlay. The restored pictures, then estimated at three hundred thousand francs, shone there.

The accession of Charles X. brought into greater court favor the family of the Duc de Chaulieu, whose eldest son, the Duc de Rhetore, was in the habit of seeing Philippe at Tullia’s. Under Charles X., the elder branch of the Bourbons, believing itself secure, followed advice to encourage adherence of former Imperial soldiers. Philippe, who had likely made invaluable revelations about the conspiracies of 1820 and 1822, was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the regiment of the Duc de Maufrigneuse. That nobleman felt bound to protect the man from whom he had taken Mariette. The corps-de-ballet went for something, therefore, in the appointment. Moreover, it was decided in private councils to give a tinge of liberalism to the Dauphin’s surroundings. Philippe, now a sort of equerry to the Duc de Maufrigneuse, was presented to the Dauphin and to the Dauphine, who liked brusque soldierly characters noted for past fidelity. Philippe understood the part the Dauphin had to play and turned this spurious liberalism to his profit by getting appointed aide-de-camp to a marshal who stood well at court.

In January, 1827, Philippe, now promoted in the Royal Guard as lieutenant-colonel in a regiment commanded by the Duc de Maufrigneuse, solicited ennoblement. Under the Restoration, nobility became a perquisite to “roturiers” serving in the Guard. Colonel Bridau had bought the estate of Brambourg and asked to entail it under the title of count. The favor was granted through his intimacies in high society, where he now appeared with the luxury of horses, carriages, and liveries; in short, the surroundings of a great lord. As soon as he saw himself gazetted as Comte de Brambourg, he began to frequent the house of a lieutenant-general of artillery, the Comte de Soulanges.

Insatiable and backed by mistresses of influential men, Philippe solicited the honor of being one of the Dauphin’s aides-de-camp. He had the audacity to tell the Dauphin that “an old soldier, wounded on many a battle-field and who knew real warfare, might, on occasion, be serviceable to Monseigneur.” Philippe, who could assume all tones of sycophancy, became in the highest social regions exactly what the position required; just as at Issoudun, he had copied Mignonnet’s respectability. He had a fine establishment and gave fêtes and dinners, admitting none of his old friends whose position might compromise him. He was pitiless to companions of former debauches and curtly refused Bixiou when that lively satirist asked him to say a word for Giroudeau, who wanted re-entry into the army after Florentine’s desertion.

“The man has neither manners nor morals,” said Philippe.

“Ha! did he say that of me?” cried Giroudeau. “Of me, who helped him get rid of his uncle!”

“We’ll pay him off yet,” said Bixiou.

Philippe intended to marry Mademoiselle Amelie de Soulanges and become a general commanding a Guard regiment. He asked so many favors that, to keep him quiet, they made him a Commander of the Legion of Honor and of Saint Louis. One rainy evening, as Agathe and Joseph returned home along the muddy streets, they met Philippe in full uniform, bedizened with orders, leaning back in a coupe lined with yellow silk, whose armorial bearings were surmounted with a count’s coronet. He was on his way to a fête at the Élysée-Bourbon; the wheels splashed his mother and brother as he waved a patronizing greeting.

“He’s going it, that fellow!” said Joseph. “Nevertheless, he might send us something better than mud in our faces.”

“He has such a fine position, in such high society, that we ought not to blame him for forgetting us,” said Madame Bridau. “When a man rises to so great a height, he has obligations to repay, sacrifices to make; it is natural he should not come to see us, though he may think of us all the same.”

“My dear fellow,” said the Duc de Maufrigneuse one evening to the new Comte de Brambourg, “I am sure your addresses will be favorably received; but to marry Amelie de Soulanges you must be free. What have you done with your wife?”

“My wife?” said Philippe, with a gesture, look, and accent worthy of Frederick Lemaitre. “Alas! I have the melancholy certainty of losing her. She has not a week to live. My dear duke, you don’t know what it is to marry beneath you. A woman who was a cook, who has the tastes of a cook! Who dishonors me—ah! I am much to be pitied. I explained my position to Madame la Dauphine. At the time of the marriage, it was a question of saving the family a million which my uncle left to that person. Happily, my wife took to drinking; at her death, I come into possession of that million, which is now in Mongenod and Sons. I have thirty thousand francs a year in the five per cents, and my entailed landed property brings forty thousand more. If Monsieur de Soulanges gets a marshal’s baton, I am on the high-road, with my title, to becoming general and peer of France. That will be the proper end of an aide-de-camp of the Dauphin.”

After the Salon of 1823, one of the leading painters obtained the management of a lottery-office near the Markets for Joseph Bridau’s mother. Agathe was able soon after to exchange it for an office in the rue de Seine, in a house where Joseph had his atelier. The widow now hired an agent herself and was no longer an expense to her son. And yet, as late as 1828, though she directed an office owed to Joseph’s fame, Madame Bridau still doubted that fame, which was hotly contested as all true glory is. The great painter, struggling with genius, had enormous wants; he did not earn enough to pay for luxuries that his relations and position in the young School of Art demanded. Though sustained by his Cenacle friends and by Mademoiselle des Touches, he did not please the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie, from whom money comes, never unties its purse for genius that is in question; unfortunately, Joseph had the classics and the Institute and their critics against him. Though backed by Gros and Géricault (Gerard), by whose influence he was decorated after the Salon of 1827, he obtained few orders. Moreover, Joseph gave way too much to imaginative fancies, producing inequality in his work which enemies used to deny his talent.

“High art is at a low ebb,” said his friend Pierre Grassou, who made daubs for bourgeois tastes.

“You ought to have a whole cathedral to decorate; that’s what you want,” declared Schinner; “then you would silence criticism with a master-stroke.”

Such speeches alarmed Agathe and confirmed her long-held judgment about Philippe and Joseph. Facts sustained that judgment in a provincial woman’s mind. Philippe, her favorite, was now a great man; his early errors were only youth’s ebullitions. Joseph, whose productions she could not appreciate—having seen them in progress too often—seemed no more advanced in 1828 than in 1816. Poor Joseph owed money and was bowed by debt; she felt he had chosen a worthless career that gave no return. She could not conceive why they had given him the Legion cross. Philippe, rich enough to cease gambling, a guest at Madame’s fêtes, the brilliant colonel appearing at reviews and processions in splendid uniforms with two crosses, realized all her maternal dreams. One day of public ceremony effaced from Agathe’s mind the sight of Philippe’s earlier misery; on that day he passed her at the same spot, in attendance on the Dauphin, with plumes in his shako and a pelisse gorgeous with gold and fur. Agathe, who to her artist son was now a devoted sister-figure, felt herself the mother of none but the dashing aide-de-camp. Proud of Philippe, she felt he made her life easy and happy—forgetting that the lottery-office enabling her to live came through Joseph.

One day Agathe noticed Joseph more worried than usual by his color-man’s bill and resolved, though cursing his profession in her heart, to free him from debts. She kept the house with the office’s proceeds and never asked Joseph for a farthing; she had no money of her own but relied on Philippe’s good heart and purse. For three years she had expected his visits; she imagined that if she appealed he would bring an enormous sum, and pictured the happiness of giving it to Joseph, whose judgment of his brother she found unfair.

Without telling Joseph, she wrote the following letter to Philippe:

  To Monsieur le comte de Brambourg:

  My dear Philippe,—You have not given the least little word of remembrance to your mother for five years. That is not right. You should remember the past, if only for the sake of your excellent brother. Joseph is now in need of money, and you are floating in wealth; he works, while you are flying from fête to fête. You now possess, all to yourself, the property of my brother. Little Borniche tells me you cannot have less than two hundred thousand francs a year. Well, then, come and see Joseph. During your visit, slip into the skull a few thousand-franc notes. Philippe, you owe them to us; nevertheless, your brother will feel grateful to you, not to speak of the happiness you will give

  Your mother,

  Agathe Bridau, nee Rouget

Two days later the concierge brought to the atelier the terrible reply:

  My dear Mother,—A man does not marry a Mademoiselle Amelie de Soulanges without the purse of Fortunatus, if under the name of Comte de Brambourg he hides that of

  Your son,

  Philippe Bridau

Agathe fell half-fainting on the sofa; the letter dropped. The slight noise and her smothered exclamation startled Joseph, who had been rubbing in a sketch. He leaned his head round the canvas, saw his mother stretched out, and rushed to lift what seemed lifeless. He carried Agathe to her bed and sent for Horace Bianchon. When he could question her she told him of her letter and its reply. Joseph went to the atelier, picked up Philippe’s concise brutality, which had broken his mother’s heart and shattered the edifice of trust. When Joseph returned to her bedside he was silent; he did not speak of his brother during the three weeks of the poor woman’s death agony. Bianchon, who watched with devotion, told Joseph the truth on the first day of her seizure.

“At her age,” he said, “and under the circumstances, all we can hope is to make her death as little painful as possible.”

She herself felt so surely called that she asked for Abbe Loraux, her confessor for over twenty-two years. Alone with him, having poured out her griefs, she said—as she had said to Madame Hochon and repeated to herself—“What have I done to displease God? Have I not loved Him with all my soul? Have I wandered from the path of grace? What is my sin? Can I be guilty of wrong when I know not what it is? Have I time to repair it?”

“No,” said the old man gently. “Alas! your life seems pure and your soul spotless; but the eye of God is keener than that of his ministers. I see the truth too late; for you have misled even me.”

Hearing such words from lips always peaceful, Agathe rose suddenly and opened wide her eyes in terror.

“Tell me! tell me!” she cried.

“Be comforted,” said the priest. “Your punishment is a proof that you will receive pardon. God chastens his elect. Woe to those whose misdeeds meet with fortunate success; they will be kneaded again in humanity until sorely punished and brought to maturity. Your life, my daughter, has been one long error. You gave your heart to an unnatural son, in whom you made your glory, and you have misunderstood the child who is your true glory. You have been so unjust that you never saw the striking contrast between the brothers. You owe the comfort of your life to Joseph, while your other son has pillaged you repeatedly. The poor son, who loves you without equal return, gives you all the comfort your life has had; the rich son, who never thinks of you, despises you and desires your death—”

“Oh no,” she cried.

“Yes,” resumed the priest. “Your humble position stands in the way of his proud hopes. Mother, these are your sins! You have sinned by ignorance. Love Joseph now; give him your heart and pray for him, as I shall for you.”

The mother’s eyes opened to her life’s course. Illuminated, she wept. The old priest, moved by her repentance, left the room hastily.

Joseph returned about two hours after the confessor had left. He had been to borrow the money needed to pay pressing debts and sat quietly, thinking his mother asleep. He sprang up with a chill as he heard her say, brokenly, “Will he forgive me?”

“What is it, mother?” he exclaimed, shocked at her expression.

“Ah, Joseph! can you pardon me, my child?” she cried.

“For what?” he said.

“I have never loved you as you deserved to be loved.”

“Oh, what an accusation!” he cried. “Not loved me? For seven years have we not lived alone together? Have you not taken care of me? Are you not my gentle and indulgent companion? I was saying to Grassou only yesterday: ‘What comforts me is that I have such a good mother. She sees to everything; she takes care of my material wants without troubling me.’”

“No, Joseph, no; you have loved me, but I have not returned love for love. Ah! would I could live a little longer—Give me your hand.”

Agathe took his hand, kissed it, held it to her heart, and looked long at him, letting him see tenderness she had hitherto bestowed only on Philippe. The painter, apt at judging expression, saw how his mother’s heart opened and took her to his breast, crying, “My mother! oh, my mother!”

“Ah! I feel that I am forgiven!” she said. “God will confirm the child’s pardon of its mother.”

“You must be calm: don’t torment yourself; hear me. I feel loved enough in this one moment for all the past,” he said, laying her back on pillows.

During the two weeks’ struggle between life and death, each effusion of feeling seemed an expression of a lifetime. The mother thought only of her son; sustained by love, she was unaware of her sufferings. D’Arthez, Michel Chrestien, Fulgence Ridal, Pierre Grassou, and Bianchon often kept Joseph company, the friends serving as a band of brothers in thought and action. Joseph, inspired by feeling and genius, divined in his mother’s occasional expressions a desire hidden in her heart and said to d’Arthez, “She has loved that brigand Philippe too well not to want to see him before she dies.”

Joseph begged Bixiou, who frequented Bohemian regions where Philippe was still occasionally found, to persuade that shameless son to play, out of pity, a little comedy that might fold the mother in an illusory peace. Bixiou, an observing misanthropic scoffer, undertook the mission. When he told the Comte de Brambourg—who received him in a bedroom hung with yellow damask—Philippe laughed.

“What the devil do you want me to do there?” he cried. “The only service the poor woman can render me is to die as soon as she can; she would be a sorry figure at my marriage with Mademoiselle de Soulanges. The less my family is seen, the better my position. You can easily understand that I should like to bury the name of Bridau under all the monuments in Père-Lachaise. My brother irritates me by bringing the name into publicity. Look at it as if it were your own: if you were a deputy, with a tongue like yours, you would be as much feared as Chauvelin; you would be made Comte Bixiou, and director of the Beaux-Arts. Once there, how should you like it if your grandmother Descoings were to turn up? Would you want that worthy woman hanging on you? Damn it, you’d wish her six feet under ground. Come, breakfast with me, and let us talk of something else. I am a parvenu, my dear fellow, and I know it. I don’t choose that my swaddling-clothes shall be seen. My son will be more fortunate than I. The scamp will wish me dead; I expect it—or he won’t be my son.”

He rang for breakfast. “The fashionable world wouldn’t see you in your mother’s bedroom,” said Bixiou. “What would it cost you to seem to love that poor woman for a few hours?”

“Whew!” cried Philippe, winking. “So you come from them, do you? I’m an old camel, who knows all about genuflections. My mother makes the excuse of her last illness to get something out of me for Joseph. No, thank you!”

When Bixiou related this to Joseph, the poor painter was chilled to the soul.

“Does Philippe know I am ill?” asked Agathe the day after Bixiou’s errand.

Joseph left, suffocating with emotion. The Abbe Loraux, sitting by the bed, took her hand and said, “Alas! my child, you have never had but one son.” The words, which Agathe understood, conveyed a shock that began the end. She died twenty hours later.

In the delirium preceding death, she murmured, “Whom does Philippe take after?”

Joseph followed his mother to the grave alone. Philippe had gone on business to Orléans; in reality he was driven from Paris by the letter Joseph wrote a moment after Agathe’s last sigh:

  Monster! my poor mother has died of the shock your letter caused her. Wear mourning, but pretend illness; I will not suffer her assassin to stand at my side before her coffin.

  Joseph B.

Joseph, who no longer had the heart to paint though grief needed the distraction of labor, was surrounded by friends who vowed never to leave him alone. Thus, two weeks after Agathe’s funeral, Bixiou sat in the atelier with a group when the servant brought a letter from an old woman below.

  Monsieur,—To you, whom I scarcely dare to call my brother, I am forced to address myself, if only on account of the name I bear.--

Joseph turned the page and read the signature: “Comtesse Flore de Brambourg.” He shuddered, foreseeing new atrocity from his brother.

“That brigand,” he cried, “is the devil’s own. And he calls himself a man of honor! And he wears crosses on his breast! And he struts at court instead of being bastinadoed! And the scoundrel is called Monsieur le Comte!”

“There are many like him,” said Bixiou.

“After all,” said Joseph, “the Rabouilleuse deserves her fate. She’s not worth pitying; she’d have had my neck wrung without saying, ‘He’s innocent.’”

Joseph flung the letter; Bixiou caught and read it aloud:

  Is it decent that the Comtesse Bridau de Brambourg should die in a hospital, no matter what her faults? If so, will you, who are the friend of Doctor Bianchon, ask him for a permit to let me enter a hospital?

  The person who carries this letter has been eleven consecutive days to the hotel de Brambourg, rue de Clichy, without getting any help from my husband. Poverty prevents me from employing a lawyer to demand what is due me, that I may die with decency. Nothing can save me, I know that. If you are unwilling to see your unhappy sister-in-law, send me, at least, the money to end my days. Your brother desires my death; he has always desired it. He warned me that he knew three ways of killing a woman, but I had not the sense to foresee the one he has employed.

  In case you will relieve me and judge for yourself my misery, I live in the rue du Houssay, corner of the rue Chantereine, on the fifth floor. If I cannot pay my rent to-morrow I shall be put out--and then, where can I go?

  Your sister-in-law,

  Comtesse Flore de Brambourg.

“What a pit of infamy!” cried Joseph; “there is something under it all.”

“Let us send for the woman who brought the letter; we may get the preface,” said Bixiou.

The woman appeared, a mass of old gowns fringed with mud, mounted on thick legs with ragged stockings and leaking shoes. Above the mound rose a head like Charlet’s scavenger-women, caparisoned with a filthy bandanna.

“What is your name?” said Joseph as Bixiou sketched her, leaning on an umbrella dated year II.

“Madame Gruget, at your service. I’ve seen better days,” she said. “If my poor girl hadn’t loved some one too much, you wouldn’t see me what I am. She drowned herself in the river, my poor Ida,—saving your presence! I’ve had the folly to nurse up a quaterne, and that’s why, at seventy-seven, I’m obliged to take care of sick folks for ten sous a day, and go—”

“—without clothes?” said Bixiou. “My grandmother nursed up a trey, but she dressed properly.”

“Out of my ten sous I pay for lodging—”

“What’s wrong with the lady you nurse?”

“In the first place, she hasn’t any money; and she has a disease that scares doctors. She owes me for sixty days’ nursing; that’s why I keep on. The husband, who is a count—she is really a countess—will no doubt pay me when she is dead; so I’ve lent her all I had. I haven’t anything left; all I did have has gone to the pawn-brokers. She owes me forty-seven francs and twelve sous, besides thirty francs for nursing. She wants to kill herself with charcoal. I tell her it ain’t right; I’ve had to get the concierge to look after her while I’m gone, or she’ll jump out the window.”

“But what’s the matter with her?” said Joseph.

“Ah! monsieur, the doctor from the Sisters’ hospital came; but as to the disease,” said Madame Gruget, modestly, “he told me she must go to the hospital. The case is hopeless.”

“Let us go and see her,” said Bixiou.

“Here,” said Joseph, “take these ten francs.”

Plunging his hand into his skull and taking out all his remaining money, Joseph called a coach and went for Bianchon, who was fortunately home. Bixiou ran to the rue de Bussy for Desroches. The four friends reached Flore’s retreat in the rue du Houssay an hour later.

“That Mephistopheles on horseback, named Philippe Bridau,” said Bixiou as they climbed the steep stair, “has sailed his boat cleverly to get rid of his wife. You know Lousteau? well, Philippe paid him a thousand francs a month to keep Madame Bridau in the society of Florine, Mariette, Tullia, and the Val-Noble. When Philippe saw his crab-girl so used to pleasure and dress that she couldn’t do without them, he stopped paying and left her to get it as she could—it is easy to know how. By the end of eighteen months the brute forced his wife lower and lower; then, by the help of a young officer, he gave her a taste for drinking. As he rose, his wife sank; the countess is now in the mud. I don’t know what means Philippe has lately taken to get rid of her. I am anxious to study this drama, for I am determined to avenge Joseph. Alas, friends,” he added, leaving them in doubt whether jesting, “give a man over to a vice and you’ll get rid of him. Didn’t Hugo say: ‘She loved a ball, and died of it’? So it is. Vice! vice! my dear friends, do you want to know what vice is? It is the Bonneau of death.”

“Then you’ll die of a joke,” said Desroches, laughing.

Above the fourth floor, they climbed a ladder-like attic stair. Though Joseph remembered Flore’s beauty, he was unprepared for the hideous spectacle. In a room with bare walls under the attic roof, on a cot with a scanty mattress, a woman lay green as a body drowned, thin as a consumptive. Her head, nearly hairless, was bound with a checked handkerchief; circles round the hollow eyes were red; eyelids like the pellicle of an egg. Nothing remained of the captivating body but an ignoble bony structure. As Flore saw Joseph, two great tears rolled down her cheeks.

“She can still weep!” whispered Bixiou. “A strange sight—tears from dominos! It’s like the miracle of Moses.”

“How burnt up!” cried Joseph.

“In the fires of repentance,” said Flore. “I cannot get a priest; I have nothing, not even a crucifix, to help me see God. Ah, monsieur!” she cried, raising arms like carved wood, “I am a guilty woman; but God never punished any one as he has punished me! Philippe killed Max, who advised dreadful things, and now he has killed me. God uses him as a scourge!”

“Leave me alone with her,” said Bianchon, “and let me see if the disease is curable.”

“If you cure her, Philippe Bridau will die of rage,” said Desroches. “I will draw up a statement of her condition. He has not brought her before the courts as an adulteress, and thus her conjugal rights stand: he shall have the shame of a suit. But first we must remove the Comtesse to Doctor Dubois’s private hospital in the rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis. She will be cared for there. Then I will summon the count for restoration of the conjugal home.”

“Bravo, Desroches!” cried Bixiou. “What a pleasure to do so much good that will make some people feel so badly!”

Ten minutes later Bianchon joined them. “I am going straight to Despleins,” he said. “He can save her by an operation. Ah! he will take care of the case, for her abuse of liquor has developed a disease thought lost.”

“Wag of a mangler! Isn’t there but one disease in life?” cried Bixiou.

Bianchon was already gone. Two hours later Flore was removed to Dubois’s hospital. Three weeks later the “Hospital Gazette” published an account of one of modern surgery’s boldest operations on a case designated by the initials “F. B.” The patient died—more from exhaustion produced by misery and starvation than from treatment.

No sooner did she die than the Comte de Brambourg went, in deep mourning, to call on the Comte de Soulanges and inform him of his sad loss. Soon after, fashion whispered that the Comte de Soulanges would marry his daughter to a parvenu of merit about to be appointed brigadier-general and given command of a Royal Guard regiment. De Marsay told Eugene de Rastignac this news at the Rocher de Cancale, where Bixiou happened to be.

“It shall not take place!” said the witty artist to himself.

Among the many old friends Philippe refused to recognize were some unable to revenge themselves; but he had wounded Bixiou, who, thanks to brilliant qualities, was everywhere received and never forgave an insult. One day at the Rocher de Cancale, before many well-bred people, Philippe had replied to Bixiou—who spoke of visiting him at the hotel de Brambourg—“You can come and see me when you are made a minister.”

“Am I to turn Protestant before I can visit you?” said Bixiou, feigning misunderstanding; but he thought, “You may be Goliath, but I have my sling.”

The next day he went to an actor friend, metamorphosed himself by dress into a secularized priest with green spectacles, drove to the hotel de Soulanges, and, received by the count on a message that he had serious business, related in a feigned voice the whole story of the dead countess and the secret particulars confided to him by Bianchon; the histories of Agathe’s death, of old Rouget’s death (which the Comte had boasted of), of Madame Descoings’s death, of the theft from the newspaper, and of Philippe’s early private morals.

“Monsieur le comte, don’t give him your daughter until you have made every inquiry; interrogate his former comrades,—Bixiou, Giroudeau, and others.”

Three months later the Comte de Brambourg gave a supper to du Tillet, Nucingen, Eugene de Rastignac, Maxime de Trailles, and Henri de Marsay. The host accepted their half-consolatory condolences about his rupture with Soulanges with nonchalance.

“You can do better,” said Maxime de Trailles.

“How much must a man have to marry a demoiselle de Grandlieu?” asked Philippe of de Marsay.

“You? They wouldn’t give you the ugliest of the six for less than ten millions,” answered de Marsay insolently.

“Bah!” said Rastignac. “With an income of two hundred thousand francs you can have Mademoiselle de Langeais; she is thirty, ugly, and penniless; that ought to suit you.”

“I shall have ten millions two years from now,” said Philippe Bridau.

“It is now the 16th of January, 1829,” cried du Tillet, laughing. “I have been hard at work for ten years and have not made as much as that yet.”

“We’ll take counsel of each other,” said Bridau; “you shall see how well I understand finance.”

“How much do you really own?” asked Nucingen.

“Three millions, excluding my house and estate, which I shall not sell; in fact, I cannot, for the property is now entailed and goes with the title.”

Nucingen and du Tillet exchanged a sly glance; du Tillet said to Philippe, “My dear count, I shall be delighted to do business with you.”

De Marsay intercepted the look, which meant, “We will have those millions.” The two bank magnates were central in political affairs and could, at a given time, manipulate matters at the Bourse to play a sure game against Philippe when probabilities seemed for him but were secretly against him.

The occasion came. In July, 1830, du Tillet and Nucingen had helped the Comte de Brambourg make fifteen hundred thousand francs; he trusted them. Philippe, owing his rise to the Restoration, was misled by profound contempt for “civilians”; he believed in the triumph of the Ordonnances and was bent on playing for a rise; du Tillet and Nucingen, sure of a revolution, played against him for a fall. The crafty pair confirmed his judgment and seemed to share his convictions; they encouraged his hopes of doubling his millions and apparently took steps to help. Philippe fought like a man with four millions depending on the struggle. His devotion was so noticeable that he received orders to go to Saint-Cloud with the Duc de Maufrigneuse and attend a council. This mark probably saved his life; for when the order came on July 25th he was intending to charge and sweep the boulevards, where he would undoubtedly have been shot by his friend Giroudeau, who commanded a division of attackers.

A month later nothing was left of Colonel Bridau’s immense fortune but his house and furniture, his estates, and the pictures from Issoudun. He committed the folly of believing in the Restoration of the elder branch, to which he remained faithful until 1834. Jealous of Giroudeau’s colonelcy, he re-entered the service. Unluckily, in 1835 he obtained command of a regiment in Algeria, where he remained three dangerous years, always hoping for a general’s epaulets. But some malignant influence—General Giroudeau—continually balked him. Grown hard and brutal, Philippe exceeded ordinary severity and was hated, despite bravery à la Murat.

At the beginning of 1839, while making a dash upon Arabs during a retreat before superior forces, he flung himself against the enemy with only a single company and fell in with the main body. The battle was bloody and terrible, man to man, and few horsemen escaped. Seeing their colonel surrounded, these men, at some distance, were unwilling to perish attempting to rescue him. They heard his cry: “Your colonel! to me! a colonel of the Empire!” but they rejoined the regiment. Philippe met a horrible death: the Arabs hacked him to pieces with scimitars and cut off his head.

Joseph, who was married about this time through Comte de Serizy to the daughter of a millionaire farmer, inherited his brother’s Paris house and the estate of Brambourg by the entail, which Philippe, had he foreseen this, would have broken. The chief pleasure Joseph derived from his inheritance was the fine collection of paintings from Issoudun. He now possesses an income of sixty thousand francs, and his father-in-law continues to pile up five-franc pieces. Though Joseph Bridau paints magnificent pictures and renders important services to artists, he is not yet a member of the Institute. As result of a clause in the deed of entail, he is now Comte de Brambourg, a fact which often makes him roar with laughter among his atelier friends.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Note: The Two Brothers is also known as A Bachelor’s Establishment and The Black Sheep. In other Addendum appearances it is referred to as A Bachelor’s Establishment.

     Bianchon, Horace
       Father Goriot
       The Atheist’s Mass
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Commission in Lunacy
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Secrets of a Princess
       The Government Clerks
       Pierrette
       A Study of Woman
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Honorine
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Magic Skin
       A Second Home
       A Prince of Bohemia
       Letters of Two Brides
       The Muse of the Department
       The Imaginary Mistress
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Betty
     In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:
       Another Study of Woman
       La Grande Bretèche

     Birotteau, Cesar
       Cesar Birotteau
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket

     Bixiou, Jean-Jacques
       The Purse
       The Government Clerks
       Modeste Mignon
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Firm of Nucingen
       The Muse of the Department
       Cousin Betty
       The Member for Arcis
       Beatrix
       A Man of Business
       Gaudissart II.
       The Unconscious Humorists
       Cousin Pons

     Brambourg, Comte de (Title of Philippe Bridau, later Joseph)
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Bridau, Philippe
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Bridau, Joseph
       The Purse
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Start in Life
       Modeste Mignon
       Another Study of Woman
       Pierre Grassou
       Letters of Two Brides
       Cousin Betty
       The Member for Arcis

     Bruel, Jean Francois du
       The Government Clerks
       A Start in Life
       A Prince of Bohemia
       The Middle Classes
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Daughter of Eve

     Bruel, Claudine Chaffaroux, Madame du
       A Prince of Bohemia
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Letters of Two Brides
       The Middle Classes

     Cabirolle, Madame
       A Start in Life

     Cabirolle, Agathe-Florentine
       A Start in Life
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

     Camusot
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Cousin Pons
       The Muse of the Department
       Cesar Birotteau
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket

     Cardot, Jean-Jerome-Severin
       A Start in Life
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket
       Cesar Birotteau

     Chaulieu, Henri, Duc de
       Letters of Two Brides
       Modeste Mignon
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Thirteen

     Chrestien, Michel
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Secrets of a Princess

     Claparon, Charles
       Cesar Birotteau
       Melmoth Reconciled
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Man of Business
       The Middle Classes

     Coloquinte
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

     Coralie, Mademoiselle
       A Start in Life
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

     Desplein
       The Atheist’s Mass
       Cousin Pons
       Lost Illusions
       The Thirteen
       The Government Clerks
       Pierrette
       The Seamy Side of History
       Modeste Mignon
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Honorine

     Desroches (son)
       Colonel Chabert
       A Start in Life
       A Woman of Thirty
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Government Clerks
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Man of Business
       The Middle Classes

     Finot, Andoche
       Cesar Birotteau
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Government Clerks
       A Start in Life
       Gaudissart the Great
       The Firm of Nucingen

     Gaillard, Madame Theodore
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Beatrix
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Gerard, Francois-Pascal-Simon, Baron
       Beatrix

     Giraud, Leon
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Secrets of a Princess
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Giroudeau
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Start in Life

     Gobseck, Esther Van
       Gobseck
       The Firm of Nucingen
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Godeschal, Francois-Claude-Marie
       Colonel Chabert
       A Start in Life
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Pons

     Godeschal, Marie
       A Start in Life
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Cousin Pons

     Grandlieu, Duc Ferdinand de
       The Gondreville Mystery
       The Thirteen
       Modeste Mignon
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Grandlieu, Mademoiselle de
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Grassou, Pierre
       Pierre Grassou
       Cousin Betty
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Pons

     Gruget, Madame Etienne
       The Thirteen
       The Government Clerks

     Haudry (doctor)
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Thirteen
       The Seamy Side of History
       Cousin Pons

     Lora, Leon de
       The Unconscious Humorists
       A Start in Life
       Pierre Grassou
       Honorine
       Cousin Betty
       Beatrix

     Loraux, Abbe
       A Start in Life
       Cesar Birotteau
       Honorine

     Lousteau, Etienne
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       A Daughter of Eve
       Beatrix
       The Muse of the Department
       Cousin Betty
       A Prince of Bohemia
       A Man of Business
       The Middle Classes
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Lupeaulx, Clement Chardin des
       The Muse of the Department
       Eugenie Grandet
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Government Clerks
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Ursule Mirouet

     Magus, Elie
       The Vendetta
       A Marriage Settlement
       Pierre Grassou
       Cousin Pons

     Matifat (wealthy druggist)
       Cesar Birotteau
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Firm of Nucingen
       Cousin Pons

     Maufrigneuse, Duc de
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Start in Life
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Nathan, Madame Raoul
       The Muse of the Department
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Government Clerks
       Ursule Mirouet
       Eugenie Grandet
       The Imaginary Mistress
       A Prince of Bohemia
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Navarreins, Duc de
       Colonel Chabert
       The Muse of the Department
       The Thirteen
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       The Peasantry
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Country Parson
       The Magic Skin
       The Gondreville Mystery
       The Secrets of a Princess
       Cousin Betty

     Rhetore, Duc Alphonse de
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Letters of Two Brides
       Albert Savarus
       The Member for Arcis

     Ridal, Fulgence
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Roguin
       Cesar Birotteau
       Eugenie Grandet
       Pierrette
       The Vendetta

     Rouget, Jean-Jacques
       The Muse of the Department

     Schinner, Hippolyte
       The Purse
       Pierre Grassou
       A Start in Life
       Albert Savarus
       The Government Clerks
       Modeste Mignon
       The Imaginary Mistress
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Serizy, Comte Hugret de
       A Start in Life
       Honorine
       Modeste Mignon
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Tillet, Ferdinand du
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Firm of Nucingen
       The Middle Classes
       Pierrette
       Melmoth Reconciled
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Member for Arcis
       Cousin Betty
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Touches, Mademoiselle Felicite des
       Beatrix
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Another Study of Woman
       A Daughter of Eve
       Honorine
       Beatrix
       The Muse of the Department

     Vernou, Felicien
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       A Daughter of Eve
       Cousin Betty
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################