A START IN LIFE


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley




                             DEDICATION

                             To Laure.

  Let the brilliant mind that gave me the subject of this Scene
  have the honor of it.

  Her brother,

  De Balzac





A START IN LIFE




CHAPTER I. THAT WHICH WAS LACKING TO PIERROTIN’S HAPPINESS


Railroads, in the not-distant future, will force certain industries to
disappear and modify several others, especially the modes of
transportation around Paris. Therefore the persons and things that are
the elements of this Scene will soon give it the character of an
archaeological work. Our nephews will be enchanted to learn the social
material of an epoch they will call the “olden time.” The picturesque
“coucous” that stood on the Place de la Concorde, encumbering the
Cours-la-Reine—coucous that had flourished for a century and were still
numerous in 1830—scarcely exist in 1842, except at some attractive
suburban solemnity like the Grandes Eaux of Versailles. In 1820 the
various celebrated places called the “Environs of Paris” did not all
possess a regular stage-coach service.

Nevertheless, the Touchards, father and son, had acquired a monopoly of
travel and transportation to all the populous towns within a radius of
forty-five miles; their enterprise was a fine establishment in the rue
du Faubourg-Saint-Denis. In spite of long-standing rights, effort,
capital, and the advantages of centralization, the Touchard coaches
(“messageries”) found terrible competition in the coucous for points
within fifteen or twenty miles. The passion of Parisians for the country
was such that local enterprise could successfully compete with the
Petites Messageries—Touchard’s name to distinguish it from the Grandes
Messageries of the rue Montmartre. Around 1822, Touchard success was
stimulating speculators. For every small locality near Paris sprang up
schemes of beautiful, rapid, commodious vehicles, departing and arriving
at fixed hours, which naturally produced fierce competition. Beaten on
longer distances of twelve to eighteen miles, the coucou descended to
shorter trips and so lived on for several years. At last it succumbed to
omnibuses, which proved possible to carry eighteen persons in a vehicle
drawn by two horses. To-day the coucous—if any remain in second-hand
carriage-shops—might be made the subject of learned researches
comparable to Cuvier’s studies of animals discovered in the chalk pits
of Montmartre.

These petty enterprises, contending since 1822 against the Touchards,
usually found a foothold in the goodwill and sympathy of the districts
they served. The proprietor and conductor was nearly always an inn-keeper
along the route, familiar with the beings, things, and interests he
served. He could execute commissions intelligently; he asked less for
his little stages, and therefore obtained more custom than the Touchard
coaches. He eluded the necessity of a custom-house permit and, if need
were, infringed the law as to passenger numbers. In short, he possessed
the affection of the masses; so whenever a rival came on the same route,
travellers would sometimes delay their journey to go with their tried
coachman, though his vehicle and horses might be far from reassuring.

One of the lines the Touchards endeavored to monopolize, and the one
most stoutly disputed, was Paris to Beaumont-sur-Oise—a profitable line,
for three rival enterprises worked it in 1822. In vain the Touchards
lowered prices, built better coaches, and started oftener. Competition
continued, so productive is a line serving little towns like
Saint-Denis and Saint-Brice, and villages like Pierrefitte, Groslay,
Ecouen, Poncelles, Moisselles, Monsoult, Maffliers, Franconville,
Presles, Nointel, Nerville, etc. The Touchard coaches extended their
route to Chambly; competition followed. Today the Toulouse, a rival,
goes as far as Beauvais.

Along this route toward England lies a road that turns off at a place
well-named, The Cave, and leads through a delightful valley in the
basin of the Oise to the little town of Isle-Adam, doubly celebrated as
the cradle of the family now extinct of Isle-Adam and as the former
residence of the Bourbon-Contis. Isle-Adam is flanked by two large
villages, Nogent and Parmain, both remarkable for splendid quarries that
have furnished material for many fine buildings in modern Paris and
abroad—the base and capital of the columns of the Brussels theatre are
of Nogent stone. Though remarkable for beautiful sites and famous
châteaux—Cassan, Stors, Le Val, Nointel, Persan, etc.—this region had
escaped competition in 1822 and was reached by two coaches only, working
more or less in harmony.

This exception to the rule of rivalry rests on easy reasons. From the
Cave, where the paved road (made by the Princes of Conti) turned off to
Isle-Adam, the distance is six miles. No speculating enterprise would
make such a detour, for Isle-Adam was the terminus of the road, which
did not go beyond it. Of late another road has been made between the
valleys of Montmorency and the Oise; but in 1822 the only road to
Isle-Adam was the paved highway of the Princes of Conti. Pierrotin and
his colleague reigned, therefore, from Paris to Isle-Adam, beloved by
everyone along the way. Pierrotin’s vehicle, his comrade’s, and Pierrotin
himself were so well known that even inhabitants on the main road as far
as the Cave were in the habit of using them; there was always a better
chance of a seat than in the Beaumont coaches, which were almost always
full. Pierrotin and his competitor were on the best of terms. When the
former started from Isle-Adam, the latter was returning from Paris,
and vice versa.

It is unnecessary to speak of the rival. Pierrotin possessed the
sympathies of his region; besides, he is the only one of the two who
appears in this veracious narrative. Suffice it to know the two coach
proprietors lived under a good understanding, rivalled loyally, and
obtained customers by honorable proceedings. In Paris they used, for
economy, the same yard, hotel, and stable, the same coach-house,
office, and clerk. This detail alone shows that Pierrotin and his rival
were, as the popular saying is, “good dough.” The hotel at which they
put up in Paris, at the corner of the rue d’Enghien, is still there and
is called the “Lion d’Argent.” The proprietor of the establishment,
which from time immemorial had lodged coachmen and coaches, drove
himself for the large company of Daumartin, so firmly established that
its neighbors, the Touchards, whose place of business was opposite,
never dreamed of starting a rival coach on the Daumartin line.

Though departures for Isle-Adam professed to take place at fixed hours,
Pierrotin and his co-rival practised an indulgence that won them the
grateful affection of country-people and violent remonstrances from
strangers used to the regularity of the great lines. But the two
conductors of these vehicles, half diligence, half coucou, were
invariably defended by their regular customers. The afternoon departure
at four usually lagged till half-past, while the morning, fixed for
eight, was seldom known to take place before nine. In summer the rule of
departure, rigorous toward strangers, was often relaxed for country
customers. This elasticity sometimes enabled Pierrotin to pocket two
fares for one place if a countryman came early and took a seat already
booked by a late “bird of passage.” Such elasticity will not commend
itself to moralists; but Pierrotin and his colleague justified it on
grounds of “hard times,” their winter losses, the necessity of new
coaches, and the duty of keeping to the rules printed on the tariff,
copies of which were seldom shown unless some obstinate traveller
demanded them.

Pierrotin, about forty, already a father, had been released from the
cavalry at the great disbandment of 1815 and had succeeded his father,
who had driven a coucou between Paris and Isle-Adam for many years.
Having married the daughter of a small inn-keeper, he enlarged the
business into a regular service and became noted for intelligence and a
certain military precision. Active and decisive, Pierrotin (a
sobriquet) gave by his vivacious countenance an expression of sly
shrewdness to his ruddy, weather-stained visage that suggested wit. He
had the facility of speech acquired by “seeing life;” his voice, rough
from shouting “Gare!” and talking to his horses, he managed to tone down
with the bourgeois. His clothing, like that of coachmen of the second
class, consisted of stout boots heavy with nails, Isle-Adam-made,
bottle-green velveteen trousers, matching waistcoat, and, while
working, a blue blouse embroidered in many colors on collar,
shoulder-straps, and cuffs. A visor cap covered his head. His military
career left him a great respect for social superiority and obedience to
the upper classes; though he never willingly mingled with the lesser
bourgeoisie, he always respected women in whatever station. Nevertheless,
by “trundling the world” he had come to regard those he conveyed as so
many walking parcels—requiring less care than the inanimate ones, the
essential object of a coaching business.

Warned by general movement since the Peace revolutionizing his calling,
Pierrotin would not be outdone by new lights. Since the beginning of
the summer season he had talked much of a certain large coach ordered
from Farry, Breilmann, and Company, the best makers of diligences—a
purchase necessitated by an influx of travellers. Pierrotin’s
establishment consisted of two vehicles. One, used in winter and the
only one he reported to the tax-gatherer, was the coucou he inherited
from his father. Its rounded flanks allowed him to put six travellers
on two metallic-hard seats, despite yellow Utrecht velvet coverings.
These seats were separated by a wooden bar inserted at shoulder height,
which could be placed or removed at will. This bar, covered with velvet
(Pierrotin called it “a back”), was the despair of passengers from the
difficulty of placing or removing it. If the “back” was painful, the
omoplates felt worse when it was in place; but when left loose across
the coach it made ingress and egress perilous, especially for women.

Though each seat of this rounded vehicle could carry only three
passengers, it was not uncommon to see eight persons on the two seats,
jammed like herrings. Pierrotin declared travellers were more
comfortable in a solid, immovable mass; when only three were on a
seat they banged one another perpetually and risked injuring their hats
against the roof on jolting roads. In front of the vehicle was a wooden
bench where Pierrotin sat, on which three travellers could perch; when
there they went by the name of “rabbits.” On certain trips he placed
four rabbits on the bench and sat at the side on a sort of box below the
body of the coach as a foot-rest for the rabbits, always full of straw
or packages that feared no damage. The body of this coucou was painted
yellow, embellished along the top with a band of barber’s blue, on which
could be read in silvery white letters “Isle-Adam, Paris,” and across the
back, “Line to Isle-Adam.”

Our descendants will be mistaken if they fancy thirteen persons
including Pierrotin were all this vehicle could carry. On great
occasions it could take three more in a square compartment covered with
an awning, where trunks and packages were piled; but prudent Pierrotin
only allowed regular customers to sit there, and then only at some
distance beyond the “barriere.” The occupants of the “hen-roost”
(conductors’ name for this section) were made to get down outside every
village or town where a gendarmerie post stood; the overloading forbidden
by law, “for the safety of passengers,” being too obvious to allow the
gendarme on duty—always a friend to Pierrotin—to avoid reporting this
violation. Thus on certain Saturday nights and Monday mornings, Pierrotin’s
coucou “trundled” fifteen travellers; but on such occasions, to drag it
along he paired his stout old horse, Rougeot, with a little pony-sized
mare named Bichette, about whose merits he had much to say. “My wife
wouldn’t give her for that fat lazybones of a Rougeot!” cried
Pierrotin when a traveller joked him about his epitome of a horse.

The other vehicle differed chiefly in being on four wheels. This comical
four-wheel-coach held seventeen travellers though bound not to carry
more than fourteen. It rumbled so noisily that Isle-Adam inhabitants
frequently said, “Here comes Pierrotin!” when he was scarcely out of the
forest crowning the valley’s slope. It was divided into two lobes: the
“interior,” containing six passengers on two seats; and a sort of
cabriolet in front called the “coupe,” closed with very inconvenient
glass sashes of fantastic construction. The four-wheeler was surmounted
by a hooded “imperial” into which Pierrotin managed to poke six
passengers; this space was inclosed by leather curtains. Pierrotin sat
on an almost invisible seat just below the coupe’s sashes.

The master of the establishment paid tax on his coucou only, rated to
carry six persons, and took out a special permit each time he drove the
four-wheeler. This may seem extraordinary now, but when taxes on
vehicles were first imposed they were timidly applied, and such
deceptions were easily practised by coach proprietors, always pleased
to “faire la queue” (cheat their dues). Gradually the Treasury became
severe; it forced all public conveyances not to roll unless they carried
two certificates—one showing they had been weighed, the other that
their taxes were duly paid. All things have their salad days, even the
Treasury; and in 1822 those days still lasted. Often in summer the
four-wheel-coach and the coucou journeyed together, carrying between
them thirty-two passengers though Pierrotin paid tax on six. On these
lucky days the convoy started from the faubourg Saint-Denis at
half-past four and arrived gallantly at Isle-Adam by ten at night.
Proud of this service, which necessitated hiring an extra horse,
Pierrotin used to say, “We went at a fine pace!” But to do the twenty-
seven miles in five hours he was forced to omit certain stoppages—at
Saint-Brice, Moisselles, and La Cave.

The hotel du Lion d’Argent occupies land deep for its width. Though its
frontage has only three or four windows on the faubourg Saint-Denis,
the building extends back through a long courtyard to the stables, a
large house standing close against the division wall of the adjoining
property. The entrance is through a passage beneath the second floor,
in which two or three coaches could stand. In 1822 the offices of all
the coach lines starting from the Lion d’Argent were kept by the
innkeeper’s wife, who had as many books as there were lines. She
received fares, booked passengers, and stowed, good-naturedly, in her
vast kitchen the packages to be transported. Travellers were satisfied
with this easy-going, patriarchal system. If they arrived too early,
they seated themselves beneath the hood of the huge kitchen chimney,
stood within the passage, or crossed to the Cafe de l’Echiquier at the
corner.

In early autumn of 1822, on a Saturday morning, Pierrotin stood with his
hands thrust into his blouse pockets beneath the porte-cochere of the
Lion d’Argent, whence he could see diagonally the kitchen and, through
the long courtyard, the stables defined in black at the end. Daumartin’s
diligence had just started, plunging heavily after those of the
Touchards. It was past eight. Under the enormous porch, above which
hung the sign “Hotel du Lion d’Argent,” stood the stablemen and porters
watching the lively start that deceives travellers into thinking the
horses will keep that gait.

“Shall I harness up, master?” asked Pierrotin’s hostler when nothing
more was seen along the road.

“It is a quarter-past eight, and I don’t see any travellers,” replied
Pierrotin. “Where have they poked themselves? Yes, harness up all the
same. And there are no parcels either! Twenty good Gods! a fine day
like this, and I’ve only four booked! A pretty state of things for a
Saturday! It is always the same when you want money! A dog’s life, and a
dog’s business!”

“If you had more, where would you put them? There’s nothing left but the
cabriolet,” said the hostler to soothe him.

“You forget the new coach!” cried Pierrotin.

“Have you really got it?” asked the man, laughing, showing teeth as white
and broad as almonds.

“You old good-for-nothing! It starts to-morrow, I tell you; and I want
at least eighteen passengers for it.”

“Ha, ha! a fine affair; it’ll warm up the road,” said the hostler.

“A coach like that which runs to Beaumont, hey? Flaming! painted red
and gold to make Touchard burst with envy! It takes three horses! I
have bought a mate for Rougeot, and Bichette will go finely in unicorn.
Come, harness up!” added Pierrotin, glancing toward the street and
stuffing tobacco into his clay pipe. “I see a lady and lad over there
with packages under their arms; they are coming to the Lion d’Argent,
for they’ve turned a deaf ear to the coucous. Tiens, tiens! seems to me
I know that lady for an old customer.”

“You’ve often started empty, and arrived full,” said his porter still by
way of consolation.

“But no parcels! Twenty good Gods! What a fate!”

Pierrotin sat on one of the huge stone posts protecting the wall from
coach wheels; he had an anxious, reflective air not habitual with him.

This conversation, apparently insignificant, stirred anxieties sleeping
in his breast. What could trouble Pierrotin about a fine new coach?
To shine on “the road,” to rival the Touchards, to magnify his line,
to carry passengers who would compliment him on coach conveniences, not
complain about his “sabots”—such was his laudable ambition; but, hoping
to outstrip his comrade and perhaps inherit the line if the latter
retired, he had gone too far. The coach was ordered from Barry,
Breilmann, and Company, coach-builders who had just substituted square
English springs for “swan-necks” and other old French contrivances.
These distrustful manufacturers would deliver the diligence only for
coin. Not pleased to build a vehicle difficult to sell, they declined
to undertake it until Pierrotin made a preliminary payment of two
thousand francs. To satisfy this demand, Pierrotin had exhausted all
resources and credit. His wife, father-in-law, and friends had bled.
This superb diligence he had seen at the painter’s the evening before;
all it needed now was to be set a-rolling, but to make it roll full
payment was required.

Now a thousand francs were lacking, and where to get them he did not
know. He was in debt to the Lion d’Argent; he risked losing the two
thousand francs already paid to the coach-builder, not counting five
hundred for Rougeot’s mate and three hundred for new harnesses on
three-months’ credit. Driven by despair and vanity, he had openly
declared the new coach would start the morrow. By offering fifteen
hundred instead of the two thousand five hundred still due, he hoped
the softened carriage-builders would give him his coach. But after a
few moments’ meditation his feelings led him to cry aloud, “No! they’re
dogs! harpies! Suppose I appeal to Monsieur Moreau, the steward at
Presles? he is such a kind man,” struck by a new idea. “Perhaps he
would take my note for six months.”

At this moment a footman in livery carrying a leather portmanteau and
coming from the Touchard establishment, where he had gone too late to
secure places as far as Chambly, came up and said, “Are you Pierrotin?”

“Say on,” replied Pierrotin.

“If you would wait a quarter of an hour, you could take my master.
If not, I’ll carry back the portmanteau and try to find some other
conveyance.”

“I’ll wait two, three quarters, and throw a little in besides, my lad,”
said Pierrotin, eyeing the pretty leather trunk, well buckled, bearing
a brass plate with a coat of arms.

“Very good; then take this,” said the valet, ridding his shoulder of the
trunk, which Pierrotin lifted, weighed, and examined.

“Here,” he said to his porter, “wrap it up carefully in soft hay and put
it in the boot. There’s no name upon it,” he added.

“Monseigneur’s arms are there,” replied the valet.

“Monseigneur! Come and take a glass,” said Pierrotin, nodding toward the
Cafe de l’Echiquier, whither he conducted the valet. “Waiter, two
absinthes!” he said as they entered. “Who is your master, and where is he
going? I have never seen you before,” said Pierrotin.

“There’s a reason for that,” said the footman. “My master only comes to
your parts about once a year, and then in his own carriage. He prefers
the valley d’Orge, where he has the most beautiful park near Paris, a
perfect Versailles, a family estate of which he bears the name. Don’t
you know Monsieur Moreau?”

“The steward of Presles?”

“Yes. Monsieur le Comte is going down to spend a couple of days with
him.”

“Ha! then I’m to carry Monsieur le Comte de Serizy!” cried the
coach-proprietor.

“Yes, my land, neither more nor less. But listen! here’s a special
order. If you have any of the country neighbors in your coach you are
not to call him Monsieur le comte; he wants to travel ‘en cognito,’ and
told me to be sure to say he would pay a handsome pourboire if not
recognized.”

“So! Has this secret journey anything to do with the affair which Pere
Leger, the farmer at the Moulineaux, came to Paris the other day to
settle?”

“I don’t know,” replied the valet, “but the fat’s in the fire. Last
night I was sent to the stable to order the Daumont carriage to be ready
to go to Presles at seven this morning. But when seven o’clock came
Monsieur le comte countermanded it. Augustin, his valet de chambre,
attributes the change to the visit of a lady who called last night and
again this morning—he thought she came from the country.”

“Could she have told him anything against Monsieur Moreau?—the best of
men, the most honest of men, a king of men, hey! He might have made a
deal more than he has out of his position, if he’d chosen; I can tell
you that.”

“Then he was foolish,” answered the valet sententiously.

“Is Monsieur le Serizy going to live at Presles at last?” asked
Pierrotin; “for you know they have just repaired and refurnished the
chateau. Do you think it is true he has already spent two hundred
thousand francs upon it?”

“If you or I had half what he has spent upon it, you and I would be
rich bourgeois. If Madame la comtesse goes there—ha! no more ease and
comfort for the Moreaus,” said the valet with an air of mystery.

“He’s a worthy man, Monsieur Moreau,” remarked Pierrotin, thinking of
the thousand francs he wanted. “He is a man who makes others work, but
he doesn’t cheapen what they do; and he gets all he can out of the
land—for his master. Honest man! He often comes to Paris and gives me a
good fee: he has lots of errands for me; sometimes three or four
packages a day—either from monsieur or madame. My bill for cartage
alone comes to fifty francs a month, more or less. If madame does set up
to be somebody, she’s fond of her children; and it is I who fetch them
from school and take them back; and each time she gives me five francs—a
real great lady couldn’t do better than that. And every time I have
anyone in the coach belonging to them or going to see them, I’m allowed
to drive up to the chateau—that’s all right, isn’t it?”

“They say Monsieur Moreau wasn’t worth three thousand francs when
Monsieur le comte made him steward of Presles,” said the valet.

“Well, since 1806, there’s seventeen years, and the man ought to have
made something at any rate.”

“True,” said the valet, nodding. “Anyway, masters are very annoying; and
I hope, for Moreau’s sake, that he has made butter for his bread.”

“I have often been to your house in the rue de la Chaussee d’Antin to
carry baskets of game,” said Pierrotin, “but I’ve never had the
advantage, so far, of seeing either monsieur or madame.”

“Monsieur le comte is a good man,” said the footman confidentially.
“But if he insists on your helping to keep up his cognito there’s
something in the wind. At any rate, so we think at the house; or else,
why should he countermand the Daumont—why travel in a coucou? A peer
of France might afford to hire a cabriolet to himself, one would think.”

“A cabriolet would cost him forty francs to go there and back; for let
me tell you, if you don’t know it, that road was only made for
squirrels—up-hill and down, down-hill and up!” said Pierrotin. “Peer
of France or bourgeois, they are all looking after the main chance, and
saving their money. If this journey concerns Monsieur Moreau, faith, I’d
be sorry any harm should come to him! Twenty good Gods! hadn’t I better
find some way of warning him?—for he’s a truly good man, a kind man, a
king of men, hey!”

“Pooh! Monsieur le comte thinks everything of Monsieur Moreau,” replied
the valet. “But let me give you a bit of good advice. Every man for
himself in this world. We have enough to do to take care of ourselves.
Do what Monsieur le comte asks you to do, and all the more because
there’s no trifling with him. Besides, to tell the truth, the count is
generous. If you oblige him so far,” said the valet, pointing
half-way down his little finger, “he’ll send you on as far as that,”
stretching his arm to its full length.

This wise reflection, and the action that enforced it, coming from a
man who stood as high as second valet to the Comte de Serizy, cooled
Pierrotin’s ardor for the steward of Presles.

A glance rapidly cast on the life of the Comte de Serizy, and on that of
his steward, is here necessary to fully understand the little drama now
about to take place in Pierrotin’s vehicle.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER II. THE STEWARD IN DANGER


Monsieur Huguet de Serisy descends in a direct line from the famous
president Huguet, ennobled under Francois I.

This family bears: party per pale or and sable, an orle counterchanged
and two lozenges counterchanged, with: “i, semper melius eris,”—a motto
that, with the distaffs as supporters, shows the modesty of burgher
families when the Orders held their places in the State, and the naivete
of ancient customs by the pun on “eris,” which, with the initial “i”
and the final “s” of “melius,” forms the name (Serisy) of the estate
from which the family take their title.

The father of the present count was president of a parliament before
the Revolution. He himself, a councillor of State at the Grand Council
of 1787 when only twenty-two, was distinguished by admirable memoranda
on delicate diplomatic matters. He did not emigrate during the
Revolution, spending that period on his estate of Serizy near Arpajon,
where his father’s standing protected him. After tending the old
president, who died in 1794, he was elected to the Council of the Five
Hundred and accepted legislative duties to divert his grief. After the
18th Brumaire, Monsieur de Serizy, like many old parliamentary families,
received the First Consul’s blandishments. He was appointed to the
Council of State, given a disorganized department to reconstruct, and
proved an active wheel in the grand organization we owe to Napoleon.

The councillor of State was soon called to a ministry. Created count and
senator by the Emperor, he served as proconsul to two kingdoms. In 1806,
at forty, he married the sister of the ci-devant Marquis de Ronquerolles,
a widow at twenty of Gaubert, an illustrious Republican general who left
her his property. This marriage, suitable in rank, doubled the count’s
fortune and made him brother-in-law of the ci-devant Marquis de Rouvre,
later a count and chamberlain under the Emperor.

In 1814, weary and in failing health, the Comte de Serizy resigned his
posts, left his department, and came to Paris. Napoleon, at first
disposed to view his action as defection, was compelled by evidence to
admit the count’s illness as a valid excuse. Though never disgraced,
the senator felt he had cause to complain of Napoleon. Consequently,
when the Bourbons returned, Louis XVIII., whom Monsieur de Serizy
regarded as his legitimate sovereign, trusted the senator, now a peer,
with his private affairs and appointed him one of his cabinet ministers.
On the 20th of March Monsieur de Serizy did not go to Ghent; he told
Napoleon he remained faithful to the Bourbons, would not accept a
peerage during the Hundred Days, and spent that period on his estate.

After the second fall of the Emperor, he became again a privy-councillor,
was appointed vice-president of the Council of State, and acted as
liquidator of claims and indemnities demanded by foreign powers. Without
personal assumption and without ambition, he possessed great influence;
nothing of importance was done without consulting him, but he never went
to court and was seldom seen in his salons. A life devoted from the
beginning to work had become incessant toil. The count rose at four in
the morning and worked till mid-day, attended to his functions as peer
and vice-president in the afternoons, and went to bed at nine. In
recognition he had the grand cross of the Legion of Honor, the orders
of the Golden Fleece, Saint-Andrew of Russia, the Prussian Eagle, and
many lesser Orders. No man was less conspicuous or more useful in
politics. The world’s honors and public glories were indifferent to him;
but such a life rarely has no serious motive. His conduct had a cruel
cause.

He had loved his wife before marrying her; the passion had lasted
through the secret unhappiness of his marriage with a widow, a woman
self-possessed both before and after her second marriage, who used her
liberty all the more because her husband treated her with the indulgence
of a parent for a spoiled child. His constant toil shielded him from
pangs he silenced with the care a diplomatist gives to secrets. He
knew how ridiculous jealousy would appear to a society that would never
have believed in the conjugal passion of an old statesman. How it came
to pass that his wife fascinated him, why he suffered without resistance,
how he dared not resist, why he let years go by and still hope—these
questions would require a long history and are here only hinted at.
One cruel secret was that the count’s labor had deprived him of
personal advantages necessary to struggle against dangerous comparisons:
a skin malady, resulting from excessive work, caused his wife repugnance.
Kind and considerate, he allowed her to be mistress of herself and of
her home. She received all Paris, went into the country, and returned
as though still a widow. He took care of her fortune and supplied her
luxury as a steward might. The countess respected and admired his mind,
and could make him happy by approbation; by an hour’s talk in his
study she could do what she pleased with him. Like old seigneurs, he
protected his wife so loyally that any disrespect toward her would have
been an unpardonable injury. The world admired him, and Madame de
Serizy owed much to it. She was ungrateful, yet mingled charm with her
ingratitude and sometimes shed balm on his wounds.

We now explain the meaning of this sudden journey and the incognito
maintained by a minister of State.

A rich farmer of Beaumont-sur-Oise, named Leger, leased and cultivated
a farm whose fields projected into and injured the Comte de Serizy’s
estate of Presles. The farm belonged to a burgher, Margueron. The lease
made to Leger in 1799, before the great advance of agriculture, was
about to expire, and Margueron refused Leger’s offers to renew it.
Monsieur de Serizy, wanting to rid himself of annoyances caused by the
inclosure of these fields, desired to buy the farm, having heard that
Margueron’s chief ambition was to have his only son, then a mere
tax-gatherer, made special collector of finances at Beaumont. The farmer,
knowing he could sell the fields piecemeal to the count at a high price,
was ready to pay Margueron more than expected from the count.

Thus matters stood when, two days earlier than the day of which we
write, Monsieur de Serizy, anxious to end the affair, sent for his
notary, Alexandre Crottat, and his lawyer, Derville, to examine the
circumstances. Though Derville and Crottat doubted the zeal of the
count’s steward (a disturbing letter from whom led to the consultation),
Monsieur de Serizy defended Moreau, who, he said, had served him faithfully
for seventeen years.

“Very well,” said Derville, “then I advise your Excellency to go to
Presles yourself, and invite this Margueron to dinner. Crottat will send
his head-clerk with a deed of sale drawn up, leaving only the necessary
lines for description of property and titles blank. Your Excellency
should take with you part of the purchase money in a check on the
Bank of France, not forgetting the appointment of the son to the
collectorship. If you don’t settle the thing at once that farm will slip
through your fingers. You don’t know, Monsieur le comte, the trickery of
these peasants. Peasants against diplomat, and the diplomat succumbs.”

Crottat agreed, and the count, as suggested by his valet Pierrotin, had
adopted the plan. The preceding evening he had sent Moreau a line by
diligence to Beaumont, telling him to invite Margueron to dinner so they
might close the purchase of the farm of Moulineaux.

Before this matter arose, the count had already ordered the chateau of
Presles restored and refurnished, and for a year Grindot, an architect
then in fashion, had made weekly visits. While concluding the purchase
the count intended to examine the restorations and new furniture as a
surprise for his wife when he brought her to Presles; he had put some
personal pride and self-love into the work. How came it, then, that the
count, who intended to drive to Presles in his own carriage in the
evening, should be starting early the next morning incognito in
Pierrotin’s coucou?

Here a few words on the life of the steward Moreau are indispensable.

Moreau, steward of Presles, was the son of a provincial attorney who
became syndic-attorney at Versailles during the Revolution. In that
position Moreau the elder almost saved the lives and property of the
Serizys; he belonged to the Danton party, was pursued by Robespierre,
and was executed at Versailles. Moreau the son, heir to his father’s
doctrines and friendships, was concerned in a conspiracy against the
First Consul. Monsieur de Serizy, anxious to pay his debt, enabled
Moreau, under sentence of death, to escape; in 1804 he sought his pardon,
obtained it, offered him a government place, and finally made him his
private secretary.

Some time after the marriage of his patron, Moreau fell in love with
the countess’s waiting-woman and married her. To avoid the annoyances
of that false position at court, Moreau asked the count to let him
manage the Presles estate, where his wife could play the lady, and
neither would suffer wounded self-love. The count wanted a trustworthy
man at Presles, for his wife preferred Serizy, an estate only fifteen
miles from Paris. For three or four years Moreau thus held the key of
the count’s affairs; he was intelligent and had studied law in his
father’s office, so Monsieur de Serizy granted his request.

“You can never advance in life,” he said to Moreau, “for you have broken
your neck; but you can be happy, and I will take care that you are so.”

He gave Moreau a salary of three thousand francs, residence in a lodge
near the chateau, all the wood he needed from estate timber, oats, hay,
and straw for two horses, and a right to the gardens’ produce. A
sub-prefect was not as well provided for.

During the first eight years of his stewardship Moreau managed the
estate conscientiously; he took interest in it. The count, visiting
now and then to examine the property and decide on purchases, was struck
with Moreau’s loyalty and showed satisfaction by liberal gifts.

But after the birth of Moreau’s third child, a daughter, he felt
secure and ceased to attribute to Monsieur de Serizy those enormous
advantages. About 1816, the steward, who until then had only taken what
he needed for himself, accepted twenty-five thousand francs from a
wood-merchant as inducement to lease the cutting of all timber for
twelve years. Moreau argued that he could have no pension, was father of
a family, and the count owed him that sum as a gift after ten years’
management; with sixty thousand francs already saved, adding this sum
would let him buy a farm worth a hundred and twenty-five thousand francs
in Champagne, a township above Isle-Adam on the Oise. Political events
prevented the count and neighbors from noticing this investment, made in
Madame Moreau’s name as if she had inherited from an aunt.

Once he tasted possession, Moreau, while maintaining an appearance of
integrity, seized opportunities to increase his fortune clandestinely;
the interests of his three children served as a poultice to his honor.
Nevertheless, in justice, though he accepted casks of wine and looked
after himself in purchases for the count, according to the Code he
remained honest, and no proof could have justified an accusation. By
local jurisprudence he shared with the count in profits due to his
management. This manner of swelling his fortune was a matter of
conscience. Alert and thoroughly understanding the count’s interests,
Moreau watched for good purchases, gaining a larger percentage. Presles
returned a revenue of seventy thousand francs net. The countryside said
for thirty miles: “Monsieur de Serizy has a second self in Moreau.”

Prudent, Moreau invested yearly after 1817, piling up his heap secretly.
He often refused proposals on the pretext of want of money, playing the
poor man so successfully that the count sent him sons to the school
Henri IV. At present Moreau held one hundred and twenty thousand francs
invested in the Consolidated thirds, now paying five per cent and
quoted at eighty francs. These hidden one hundred and twenty thousand
and his Champagne farm, enlarged by purchases, amounted to about two
hundred and eighty thousand francs, giving an income of some sixteen
thousand.

Such was the steward’s position when the Comte de Serizy wished to buy
the Moulineaux farm—ownership indispensable to his comfort. The farm
consisted of ninety-six parcels bordering Presles and often running into
it, causing disputes about hedges, ditches, and tree-cutting. Any other
than a cabinet minister would probably have had lawsuits. Pere Leger
only wished to buy the property to sell to the count at a handsome
advance. To secure the exorbitant sum he desired, the farmer had sought
an understanding with Moreau. Three days before this critical Sunday he
had talked with the steward and showed that Moreau could make the count
invest at two and a half per cent and thus pocket forty thousand francs
off Leger’s offer.

“I tell you what,” said the steward to his wife as he went to bed,
“if I make fifty thousand francs out of the Moulineaux affair—and I
certainly shall, for the count will give me ten thousand as a fee—we’ll
retire to Isle-Adam and live in the Pavillon de Nogent.”

This “pavillon,” built by the Prince de Conti for a mistress, was
furnished with convenience and luxury.

“That will suit me,” said his wife. “The Dutchman who lives there has
put it in good order, and now that he is obliged to return to India,
he would probably let us have it for thirty thousand francs.”

“We shall be close to Champagne,” said Moreau. “I hope to buy the farm
and mill of Mours for a hundred thousand francs. That would give us ten
thousand a year. Nogent is one of the most delightful residences in the
valley; and we should still have an income of ten thousand from the
Grand-Livre.”

“But why not ask for the post of juge-de-paix at Isle-Adam? That would
give influence and fifteen hundred a year.”

“Well, I did think of it.”

With these plans, Moreau, hearing that the count was coming to Presles
and wished him to invite Margueron to dinner on Saturday, sent an
express to the count’s head-valet enclosing a letter to his master,
which the messenger failed to deliver before Monsieur de Serizy retired.
Augustin, however, placed it, by custom, on his master’s desk. In the
letter Moreau begged the count not to come down, but to trust him
entirely; he added that Margueron was no longer willing to sell the
whole at once and talked of cutting the farm into lots. It was necessary
to circumvent this plan, and perhaps it might be best to employ a third
party to make the purchase.

Everybody has enemies. Now the steward and his wife had wounded the
feelings of a retired officer, Monsieur de Reybert, and his wife, living
near Presles. From pin-prick speeches matters had advanced to dagger
thrusts. Monsieur de Reybert sought vengeance. He was determined to make
Moreau lose his situation and gain it himself. The steward’s doings,
spied on for two years, were no secret to Reybert. The same conveyance
that took Moreau’s letter to the count carried Madame de Reybert to Paris,
whom her husband despatched. There she so earnestly asked to see the
count that although sent away at nine, she was ushered into his study
the next morning at seven.

“Monsieur,” she said to the cabinet-minister, “we cannot write anonymous
letters, so I have come in person. I am Madame de Reybert, nee de Corroy.
My husband is a retired officer with a pension of six hundred francs,
and we live at Presles, where your steward has offered us insult after
insult, though we are persons of good station. Monsieur de Reybert, who
is not intriguing, retired in 1816 after twenty years—always at a
distance from the Emperor. You know how difficult it is for soldiers
not under the eye of their master to obtain promotion, not counting that
the integrity and frankness of Monsieur de Reybert displeased superiors.
My husband has watched your steward for three years, aware of his
dishonesty and intending to have him lose his place. We are frank with
you. Moreau has made us his enemies, and we have watched him. I have
come to tell you you are being tricked in the Moulineaux purchase. They
mean to get an extra hundred thousand francs out of you, to be divided
between the notary, the farmer Leger, and Moreau. You have written
Moreau to invite Margueron, and you are going to Presles today; but
Margueron will be ill, and Leger is so certain of buying the farm he is
now in Paris with the money. If we have enlightened you, and you want
an upright steward, take my husband; though noble, he will serve you as
he has served the State. Your steward has made two hundred and fifty
thousand francs from his place; he is not to be pitied.”

The count thanked Madame de Reybert coldly, giving the holy-water of
courts, for he despised backbiting; but he remembered Derville’s doubts
and felt shaken. Just then he saw his steward’s letter and read it. In
its assurances of devotion and its respectful reproaches for the implied
distrust, he read the truth.

“Corruption has come to him with fortune—as it always does!” he said.

The count then made inquiries of Madame de Reybert, less to obtain
information than to observe her; and he wrote a short note to his
notary telling him not to send his head-clerk to Presles as requested,
but to come himself in time for dinner.

“Though Monsieur le comte,” said Madame de Reybert, concluding, “may
have judged me unfavorably for acting unknown to my husband, he ought to
be convinced we obtained this information in a natural and honorable
manner; the most sensitive conscience cannot take exception to it.”

So saying, Madame de Reybert, nee de Corroy, stood erect as a pike-staff.
She presented to the count’s rapid investigation a face seamed with
small-pox, a flat spare figure, two light eager eyes, fair hair plastered
on an anxious forehead, a small drawn bonnet of faded green taffetas
lined with pink, a white gown with violet spots, and leather shoes. The
count recognized the wife of some poor, half-pay captain, a puritan,
earnest in virtue but mindful of the comfort of a good situation and
eagerly coveting it.

“You say your husband has a pension of six hundred francs,” he said,
replying to his thoughts, not her remark.

“Yes, monsieur.”

“You were born a Corroy?”

“Yes, monsieur,—a noble family of Metz, where my husband belongs.”

“In what regiment did Monsieur de Reybert serve?”

“The 7th artillery.”

“Good,” said the count, writing down the number.

He had thought at one time of giving management of the estate to some
retired officer, about whom he could get exact information from the
minister of war.

“Madame,” he resumed, ringing for his valet, “return to Presles this
afternoon with my notary, who is going down for dinner and to whom I
have recommended you. Here is his address. I am going myself secretly
to Presles, and will send for Monsieur de Reybert to come and speak to
me.”

Thus Monsieur de Serizy’s journey by public conveyance and the valet’s
injunction to conceal his name and rank had not needlessly alarmed
Pierrotin. That worthy had forebodings of a danger about to swoop down
upon one of his best customers.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
As Pierrotin issued from the Cafe de l’Echiquier after treating the valet, he saw in the gateway of the Lion d’Argent a lady and a young man whom he at once recognized as customers; the lady, with outstretched neck and anxious face, evidently looked for him. She wore a black-silk gown that had been dyed, a brown bonnet, an old French cashmere shawl, raw-silk stockings, low shoes, and carried a straw bag and a blue umbrella. Once beautiful, she seemed about forty, but her blue eyes, stripped of the fire happiness gives, showed she had long renounced the world. Her dress and demeanor indicated a mother wholly devoted to her household and her son. The bonnet’s faded strings and its shape betrayed its age; the shawl was fastened with a broken needle stuck into sealing-wax. She was waiting impatiently for Pierrotin, wanting to entrust her son—doubtless travelling for the first time—to his care.

The son completed the picture. If the mother mended gloves, the son wore an olive-green coat with sleeves too short, showing he had grown; his blue trousers, repaired by his mother, showed a brighter patch when the coat-tails parted behind him.

“Don’t rub your gloves that way, you’ll spoil them,” she said as Pierrotin appeared. “Is this the conductor? Ah! Pierrotin, is it you?” she exclaimed, leaving her son and taking the coachman aside.

“I hope you’re well, Madame Clapart,” he replied, with an air mixing respect and familiarity.

“Yes, Pierrotin, very well. Please take good care of my Oscar; he is travelling alone for the first time.”

“Oh! so he is going alone to Monsieur Moreau!” cried Pierrotin, to learn whether he was really going there.

“Yes,” said the mother.

“Then Madame Moreau is willing?” returned Pierrotin, with a sly look.

“Ah!” said the mother, “it will not be all roses for him, poor child! But his future absolutely requires that I should send him.”

This answer struck Pierrotin. He hesitated to confide his fears for the steward to Madame Clapart, while she feared harming her son by asking for too much care. During this short deliberation, covered by phrases about the weather, journey, and stopping places, we will explain the ties that united Madame Clapart with Pierrotin and authorized the remarks they exchanged.

Often—three or four times a month—Pierrotin, on his way to Paris, would find the steward on the road near La Cave. As soon as the vehicle came up, Moreau would sign to a gardener, who, with Pierrotin’s help, would put upon the coach one or two baskets containing fruits, vegetables, chickens, eggs, butter, and game. The steward always paid the carriage and Pierrotin’s fee, adding money for the toll at the barriere if the baskets contained dutiable goods. These parcels were never addressed. The steward, on the first occasion, had given Madame Clapart’s address by word of mouth to the discreet Pierrotin, requesting him never to deliver the packages to others. Pierrotin, imagining an intrigue between the steward and some pretty girl, went to number 7 rue de la Cerisaie and found Madame Clapart instead of the young beauty he had expected.

Drivers of public conveyances enter many homes and learn many secrets; but social accident has willed that they are often without education and poor observers, so they are not dangerous. Nevertheless, after months Pierrotin was puzzled to explain Moreau and Madame Clapart’s exact relation from what he saw of the household. Though lodgings were not dear in the Arsenal quarter, Madame Clapart lived on a third floor at the end of a courtyard in a house once belonging to a great family when the nobility inhabited the old Tournelles and Saint-Paul sites. Toward the late sixteenth century those grandeurs were divided into the present streets—Cerisaie, Beautreillis, des Lions, etc. Madame Clapart’s flat, panelled with ancient carvings, consisted of three rooms—dining-room, salon, and bedroom; above was the kitchen and Oscar’s bedroom. Opposite the entrance, on the square landing, was a door opening into a rough stone tower built with a well for the staircase; that back room was where Moreau slept when in Paris.

Pierrotin had seen in the first room, where he deposited the hampers, six wooden chairs with straw seats, a table, and a sideboard; the windows had discolored curtains. In the salon he noticed old Empire furniture now shabby; the bedroom matched the salon and dining-room. The coarsely painted wood-work blurred the mouldings; the floors, never waxed, had the gray tone of boarding-schools. When Pierrotin visited Monsieur and Madame Clapart at meals he noted that the china and glass betrayed the utmost poverty; yet the forks and spoons were silver.

Monsieur Clapart, in a shabby surtout and broken slippers, always wore green spectacles and, when he removed his shabby cap, showed a pointed skull with a few dirty filaments hardly to be called hair. Timorous yet tyrannical, he looked wan.

In that dreary north-facing apartment, with only a vine and a well to look on, Madame Clapart bore herself like a queen and moved like a woman unaccustomed to walking. Often, while thanking Pierrotin, she gave him glances to touch a sensitive observer and would slip a twelve-sous piece into his hand; her voice would then be charming. Pierrotin had never seen Oscar because the boy was always at school when his business took him to the house.

Here is the sad story Pierrotin could not have discovered by asking the portress, who only knew the Claparts paid 250 francs a year, had no servant but a charwoman coming a few hours each morning, that Madame Clapart did some washing herself, and paid postage daily as she could not let money accumulate.

There seldom exists a criminal wholly criminal; nor a dishonest nature entirely dishonest. A man may cheat his master yet do good at times. If Moreau’s faults can be excused, it might be for his persistent kindness to a woman whose favours he once claimed and in whose house he had hidden when condemned to death in 1797.

This woman, celebrated under the Directory for a liaison with a powerful protector, married through that protection a purveyor named Husson, who made millions from government contracts but whom Napoleon ruined in 1802. Husson became insane and threw himself into the Seine, leaving Madame Husson pregnant. Moreau, intimately allied with her, was then condemned to death and could not marry her; forced to leave France, he watched over her. Madame Husson, at twenty-two, married a clerk named Clapart, aged twenty-seven, rumored to be a rising man. But Clapart, though coarse and handsome, had no intelligence. Expecting wealth, he feigned passion but could not supply the wants she had known. He filled a Treasury post badly, giving a salary of eighteen hundred francs, which was all the household had to live on. When Moreau returned as secretary to the Comte de Serizy he learned of Madame Husson’s plight and obtained, before his own marriage, an appointment for her as head waiting-woman to Madame Mere, the Emperor’s mother. Despite such protection, Clapart was never promoted; his incapacity showed.

Ruined in 1815 by the fall of the Empire, the brilliant Aspasia of the Directory had no resources other than Clapart’s clerk’s salary of twelve hundred francs from a job procured by the Comte de Serizy. Moreau, the only protector of a woman he had known in opulence, obtained a half-scholarship for her son, Oscar Husson, at the school of Henri IV, and sent her regularly, by Pierrotin, such supplies from the estate at Presles as he could decently offer to a household in distress.

Oscar was his mother’s whole life and future. The poor woman’s only fault was exaggerated tenderness for her boy—the bete-noire of his step-father. Oscar, unfortunately, had a foolish overweening conceit his mother did not perceive despite the step-father’s sarcasms. This conceit so troubled Monsieur Moreau that he begged Madame Clapart to send the boy to him for a month so he might study his character and find a suitable career; Moreau thought of proposing Oscar as his successor to the count.

To give each thing its due, we should show the causes of Oscar’s silly vanity: he was born in Madame Mere’s household, dazzled in childhood by imperial splendors. His imagination retained those images and nursed hopes of regaining a golden past. The natural boastfulness of schoolboys, resting on these memories and on maternal tales of former splendour, developed excessively. Oscar, leaving school, had borne many humiliations as a scholarship pupil among paying students unless the scholar can impose respect by physical superiority.

This mixture of departed splendor, faded beauty, blind maternal love, and heroic suffering made the mother a pathetic figure in Paris.

Incapable of understanding Moreau’s real attachment to her, and of that woman’s for the man who saved her in 1797, Pierrotin did not communicate his suspicion of danger to Moreau. His thought, “We have enough to do in this world to look after ourselves,” returned to mind, along with his obedience to what he called the “chefs de file”—men of rank. Besides, Pierrotin’s head was full of his own stings like coins in a purse. So his “Very good, madame,” “Certainly, madame,” in reply to the poor mother showed his desire to escape her long instructions.

“You will be sure to place the packages so they can’t get wet if the weather changes.”

“I’ve a hood,” replied Pierrotin. “Besides, see with what care they are placed.”

“Oscar, don’t stay more than two weeks, no matter how much they may ask you,” continued Madame Clapart, returning to her son. “You can’t please Madame Moreau, whatever you do; besides, you must be home by the end of September. We are to go to Belleville, you know, to your uncle Cardot.”

“Yes, mamma.”

“Above all,” she said in a low voice, “never speak about servants; keep thinking all the time that Madame Moreau was once a waiting-maid.”

“Yes, mamma.”

Like all youths whose vanity is excessively ticklish, Oscar seemed annoyed at being lectured on the threshold of the Lion d’Argent.

“Well, now good-bye, mamma. We shall start soon; there’s the horse all harnessed.”

The mother, forgetting she was in the street, embraced Oscar and smiling took a little roll from her basket.

“Tiens! you were forgetting your roll and the chocolate! My child, don’t take anything at the inns; they’ll charge you ten times the value.”

Oscar would have liked his mother farther off as she stuffed the roll and chocolate into his pocket. Two young men a few years older than Oscar, better dressed and without a mother hanging on them—complete in independence—witnessed the scene.

“He said mamma!” cried one, laughing.

The words reached Oscar and drove him to say, “Good-bye, mother!” in a tone of terrible impatience.

Madame Clapart spoke too loudly and seemed desirous to show her tenderness. “What is the matter with you, Oscar?” she asked. “I don’t know what to make of you,” she added severely, then resumed in her tender voice, “Listen, my Oscar—do not talk and show off; keep your tongue in check. You are not advanced enough to judge persons; there is nothing more dangerous than speaking in public conveyances. Besides, in a diligence well-bred persons always keep silence.”

The two young men had walked to the other end of the establishment and returned with boot-heels tapping. To rid himself of his mother, Oscar took an heroic measure that showed vanity stimulating intellect.

“Mamma,” he said, “you are standing in a draught, and you may take cold. Besides, I am going to get into the coach.”

The lad touched a tender spot; his mother caught him to her bosom, kissed him as if he were starting on a long journey, and went with him to the vehicle with tears. “Don’t forget to give five francs to the servants when you come away,” she said; “write me three times at least during the fifteen days; behave properly, and remember all I have told you. You have linen enough; don’t send any to the wash. And above all, remember Monsieur Moreau’s kindness; mind him as you would a father, and follow his advice.”

As he got into the coach Oscar’s blue woollen stockings became visible as his trousers pulled up, and the new patch showed through the parting coat-tails. The smiles of the two young men, on whom these signs of respectable indigence were not lost, were fresh wounds to his vanity.

“The first place was engaged for Oscar,” said the mother to Pierrotin. “Take the back seat,” she said to the boy with a loving smile.

Oh how Oscar regretted that trouble and sorrow had destroyed his mother’s beauty and that poverty prevented her being better dressed! One young man, wearing top-boots and spurs, nudged the other to notice Oscar’s mother; the other twirled his moustache as if to say, “Rather a pretty figure!”

“How shall I ever get rid of mamma?” thought Oscar.

“What’s the matter?” asked Madame Clapart.

He pretended not to hear. Perhaps she lacked tact; all absorbing sentiments have much egoism.

“Georges, do you like children when travelling?” asked one young man of the other.

“Yes, my good Amaury, if they are weaned, and are named Oscar, and have chocolate.”

These remarks, uttered in half-tones, allowed Oscar to hear or not; his face would indicate how much fun they might make of him. Oscar chose not to hear and looked to see if his mother, weighing on him like a nightmare, was still there. He compared his companion’s dress with his own and felt that his mother’s toilet counted for much in the youths’ smiles. “If they would only take themselves off!” he thought.

Instead, Amaury tapped the coucou’s wheel and remarked to Georges, “And so, my friend, you are really going to trust your future to this fragile bark?”

“I must,” replied Georges, fatalistically.

Oscar sighed as he noted the jaunty hat of his companion, revealing blond hair; he had black hair cut close by order of his step-father. The chubby healthy face of the vain lad contrasted with the long pale one of the other. The latter’s broad forehead and filled chest showed a cashmere waistcoat; his tight iron-gray trousers and frogged overcoat looked elegant; the sight galled Oscar like an ugly woman seeing a pretty one. The click of the stranger’s boot-heels echoed in his heart; he felt hampered by his clothes—which were probably his step-father’s—while the other seemed at ease.

“That fellow must have heaps of francs in his trousers pocket,” thought Oscar.

The young man turned. Oscar saw a gold chain and a watch; from then on the young man assumed the proportions of a personage.

Living in rue de la Cerisaie since 1815, taken to and from school by his step-father and seldom seeing anything but his mother’s poverty, Oscar had little comparison. Brought up strictly on Moreau’s advice, he seldom went to the theatre except to the Ambigu-Comique. His step-father still wore his watch in the fob with a heavy gold chain and various ornaments; Oscar considered that old-fashioned finery the “ne plus ultra.” He was bewildered by the revelation of superior, negligent elegance: spotless gloves, a gold-headed switch cane twirled with grace.

Oscar had reached that last quarter of adolescence when little things cause immense joys and miseries—a period when youth prefers misfortune to a ridiculous suit and torments itself about neckcloths and the desire to appear a man. Then the lad swells; his swagger is portentous because it boasts about nothings. Yet a lad who envies a well-dressed fool may also admire talent. Such defects, unless rooted in the heart, prove only youthful exuberance. For a nineteen-year-old only child kept at home by poverty and adored by an indulgent mother to envy a twenty-two-year-old in a frogged surtout is a peccadillo common to all ranks.

But Oscar passed from peccadillo to ill feeling. He felt humiliated, angry with the youth he envied, and secretly desired to show he was as good.

The two young fellows continued walking up and down from the gate to the stables; each time they turned they looked at Oscar curled in his corner. Oscar, convinced their jokes concerned him, affected indifference. He began to hum a chorus lately in vogue among liberals ending, “‘Tis Voltaire’s fault, ‘tis Rousseau’s fault.”

“Tiens! perhaps he is one of the chorus at the Opera,” said Amaury.

This exasperated Oscar, who bounded up, pulled out the wooden “back,” and called to Pierrotin: “When do we start?”

“Presently,” said Pierrotin, whip in hand, gazing toward rue d’Enghien.

At this moment a young man arrived with a true gamin followed by a porter dragging a hand-cart. The young man spoke confidentially to Pierrotin, who nodded and called his porter. The porter helped unload the cart, which contained two trunks, buckets, brushes, oddly shaped boxes, and innumerable packages that the gamin stowed with such speed Oscar, then smiling at his mother across the street, noticed none of the paraphernalia that might reveal his new companion’s profession.

The gamin, about sixteen, wore a gray blouse buckled by a leather belt, a cap jauntily perched, curly brown hair on his shoulders, a black-silk cravat around a very white neck, bright gray eyes, and a vivacious, mischievous face—Figaro-like. His gestures and mocking eye showed a lively intellect made by early vocation. Unconcerned about costume, he looked at his unpolished boots as a quizzical effect. “I’m in style,” he said, shaking himself and addressing his companion.

The companion’s glance showed authority over the adept; a practised eye would call the gamin a “rapin.” “Behave yourself, Mistigris,” said his master.

The master was a slight pale young man with thick black hair worn fantastically. His abundant hair suited an enormous head with a vast forehead proclaiming precocious intellect. His strained, harassed face was hollowed as if from chronic malady, poverty, or recent grief. His shabby American-green surtout was clean and brushed; a black waistcoat buttoned to the throat almost concealed a scarlet neckerchief; black trousers flapped his thin legs; muddy boots showed he had come on foot. With a rapid look he seized the Lion d’Argent scene, then glanced at Mistigris’s satirical stare.

“Charming!” said Mistigris.

“Yes, very,” replied the other.

“We seem to have got here too early,” continued Mistigris. “Couldn’t we get a mouthful somewhere? My stomach, like Nature, abhors a vacuum.”

“Have we time for a cup of coffee?” the artist asked Pierrotin.

“Yes, but don’t be long,” answered Pierrotin.

“Good; that means a quarter of an hour,” said Mistigris.

The pair disappeared. Nine o’clock was striking in the hotel kitchen. Georges thought it reasonable to remonstrate with Pierrotin.

“Hey! my friend; with such wheels as these (striking the clumsy tires with his cane) one might expect punctuality. I have devilishly pressing business or I wouldn’t trust my bones to it. And that horse you call Rougeot doesn’t look fit to make up for lost time.”

“We are going to harness Bichette while those gentlemen take their coffee,” replied Pierrotin. “Go and ask,” he said to his porter, “if Pere Leger is coming with us—”

“Where is your Pere Leger?” asked Georges.

“Over the way, at number 50. He couldn’t get a place in the Beaumont diligence,” said Pierrotin, making no answer to his customer; then he disappeared in search of Bichette.

Georges, after shaking hands with his friend, got into the coach, handling an important portfolio which he placed beneath the seat cushion. He took the opposite corner to Oscar on the same seat.

“This Pere Leger troubles me,” he said.

“They can’t take away our places,” replied Oscar. “I have number one.”

“And I number two,” said Georges.

Just as Pierrotin reappeared having harnessed Bichette, the porter returned with a stout man whose weight could not be less than two hundred and fifty pounds. Pere Leger belonged to the farmer species—square back, protuberant stomach, powdered pigtail, little blue linen coat, white gaiters above the knee fastened over velveteen breeches with silver buckles, and hob-nailed shoes. He held a small polished reddish stick with a large knob and a leather thong.

“And you are called Pere Leger?” asked Georges very seriously as the farmer attempted to step up.

“At your service,” replied the farmer with a face like Louis XVIII, fat rubicund cheeks, and a large nose; his smiling eyes sunken in rolls of fat. “Come, a helping hand, my lad!” he said to Pierrotin.

The farmer was hoisted in by Pierrotin and the porter amid cries of “Houp la! hi! ha! hoist!” uttered by Georges.

“Oh! I’m not going far; only to La Cave,” said the farmer, good-humoredly.

In France everyone takes a joke.

“Take the back seat,” said Pierrotin, “there’ll be six of you.”

“Where’s your other horse?” demanded Georges. “Is it as mythical as the third post-horse.”

“There she is,” said Pierrotin, pointing to the little mare coming along alone.

“He calls that insect a horse!” exclaimed Georges.

“Oh! she’s good, that little mare,” said the farmer, now seated. “Your servant, gentlemen. Well, Pierrotin, how soon do you start?”

“I have two travellers in there after a cup of coffee,” replied Pierrotin.

The hollow-cheeked young man and his page reappeared.

“Come, let’s start!” was the general cry.

“We are going to start,” replied Pierrotin. “Now, then, make ready,” he said to the porter, who removed the stones that stopped the wheels.

Pierrotin took Rougeot by the bridle and gave that guttural cry, “Ket, ket!” to urge the two animals; though stiff, they pulled the coach to the Lion d’Argent door. Then Pierrotin gazed up rue d’Enghien and disappeared, leaving the coach to the porter.

“Ah ca! is he subject to such attacks—that master of yours?” said Mistigris to the porter.

“He has gone to fetch his feed from the stable,” replied the porter, versed in tricks to keep passengers calm.

“Well, after all,” said Mistigris, “‘art is long, but life is short’--to Bichette.”

At that time the studios fancied mutilating or transposing proverbs; it was a triumph to change letters or words to keep the semblance while making a fantastic meaning.

“Patience, Mistigris!” said his master; “‘come wheel, come whoa.’”

Pierrotin returned bringing the Comte de Serizy, who had come through rue de l’Echiquier and with whom Pierrotin had doubtless conversed.

“Pere Leger,” said Pierrotin, looking into the coach, “will you give your place to Monsieur le comte? That will balance the carriage better.”

“We sha’n’t be off for an hour if you go on this way,” cried Georges. “We shall have to take down this infernal bar, which cost such trouble to put up. Why should everyone move for the man who comes last? We all have a right to the places we took. What place has monsieur engaged? Come, find that out! Haven’t you a way-book, a register, or something? What place has Monsieur Lecomte engaged—count of what, I’d like to know.”

“Monsieur le comte,” said Pierrotin, visibly troubled, “I am afraid you will be uncomfortable.”

“Why didn’t you keep better count of us?” said Mistigris. “‘Short counts make good ends.’”

“Mistigris, behave yourself,” said his master.

Monsieur de Serizy was evidently taken by people in the coach for a bourgeois named Lecomte.

“Don’t disturb anyone,” he said to Pierrotin. “I will sit with you in front.”

“Come, Mistigris,” said the master to his rapin, “remember the respect you owe to age; you don’t know how shockingly old you may be yourself some day. ‘Travel deforms youth.’ Give your place to monsieur.”

Mistigris opened the leather curtain and jumped out with frog-like agility.

“You mustn’t be a rabbit, august old man,” he said to the count.

“Mistigris, ‘ars est celare bonum,’” said his master.

“I thank you very much, monsieur,” said the count to Mistigris’s master, next to whom he now sat.

The minister of State cast a sagacious glance round the coach interior, affronting both Oscar and Georges.

“When persons want to be master of a coach they should engage all the places,” remarked Georges.

Certain now of his incognito, the Comte de Serizy made no reply but assumed a good-natured bourgeois air.

“Suppose you were late, wouldn’t you be glad the coach waited for you?” said the farmer to the two young men.

Pierrotin still looked up and down the street, whip in hand, apparently reluctant to mount the hard seat where Mistigris fidgeted.

“If you expect someone else, I am not the last,” said the count.

“I agree to that reasoning,” said Mistigris.

Georges and Oscar began to laugh impertinently.

“The old fellow doesn’t know much,” whispered Georges to Oscar, who was delighted at this apparent union between himself and the object of his envy.

“Parbleu!” cried Pierrotin, “I shouldn’t be sorry for two more passengers.”

“I haven’t paid; I’ll get out,” said Georges, alarmed.

“What are you waiting for, Pierrotin?” asked Pere Leger.

Whereupon Pierrotin shouted a certain “Hi!” in which Bichette and Rougeot recognized a definitive resolution and sprang toward the faubourg at a pace soon to slacken.

The count had a burning red face with inflamed portions highlighted by snow-white hair. These blotches injured his naturally noble air; careful examination was needed to find in his green-gray eyes the shrewdness of a magistrate, the wisdom of a statesman, and a legislator’s knowledge. His face was flat, the nose depressed into it. The hat hid the grace of his forehead. There was enough odd contrast—silvery hair, burning face, thick black brows—to amuse youths.

He wore a long blue overcoat buttoned military-fashion to the throat, a white cravat, cotton wool in his ears, a high shirt-collar making a white patch on each cheek. His black trousers covered his boots whose toes were barely seen. No decoration adorned him; doeskin gloves concealed his hands. Nothing betrayed a peer of France and one of the kingdom’s most useful statesmen.

Pere Leger had never seen the count, who knew the farmer only by name. When the count entered the carriage he cast a glance about him that affronted Georges and Oscar but was truly looking for the head-clerk of his notary in case he had been forced, like himself, into Pierrotin’s vehicle, intending to caution him about his incognito. Feeling reassured by Oscar, Pere Leger, and the quasi-military air, waxed moustaches, and adventurer look of Georges, he concluded his note had reached his notary Alexandre Crottat in time to keep the clerk from leaving.

“Pere Leger,” said Pierrotin when they reached the steep faubourg Saint-Denis at rue de la Fidelite, “suppose we get out, hey?”

“I’ll get out, too,” said the count, hearing Leger’s name.

“Goodness! if this is how we go we shall do fourteen miles in fifteen days!” cried Georges.

“It isn’t my fault,” said Pierrotin, “if a passenger wishes to get out.”

“Ten louis for you if you keep the secret of my being here as I told you before,” said the count in a low voice, taking Pierrotin by the arm.

“Oh, my thousand francs!” thought Pierrotin as he winked at Monsieur de Serizy, meaning, “Rely on me.”

Oscar and Georges stayed in the coach.

“Look here, Pierrotin, since Pierrotin you are,” cried Georges when they were stowed away again, “if you don’t mean to go faster than this, say so! I’ll pay my fare and take a post-horse at Saint-Denis; I have important business.”

“Oh! he’ll go well enough,” said Pere Leger. “Besides, the distance isn’t great.”

“I am never more than half an hour late,” asserted Pierrotin.

“Well, you are not wheeling the Pope in this old barrow,” said Georges, “so, get on.”

“Perhaps he’s afraid of shaking monsieur,” said Mistigris looking at the count. “But you shouldn’t have preferences, Pierrotin, it isn’t right.”

“Coucous and the Charter make all Frenchmen equals,” said Georges.

“Oh! be easy,” said Pere Leger; “we are sure to get to La Chapelle by mid-day,”—La Chapelle being the village beyond the Barriere of Saint-Denis.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER IV. THE GRANDSON OF THE FAMOUS CZERNI-GEORGES


Those who travel in public conveyances know that the persons thus united
by chance do not immediately have anything to say to one another; unless
under special circumstances, conversation rarely begins until they have
gone some distance. This period of silence is employed as much in mutual
examination as in settling into their places. Minds need to get their
equilibrium as much as bodies. When each person thinks he has discovered
the age, profession, and character of his companions, the most talkative
member of the company begins, and the conversation gets under way with
all the more vivacity because those present feel a need of enlivening
the journey and forgetting its tedium.

That is how things happen in French stage-coaches. In other countries
customs are very different. Englishmen pique themselves on never opening
their lips; Germans are melancholy in a vehicle; Italians too wary to
talk; Spaniards have no public conveyances; and Russians no roads.
There is no amusement except in the lumbering diligences of France, that
gabbling and indiscreet country, where every one is in a hurry to laugh
and show his wit, and where jest and epigram enliven all things, even
the poverty of the lower classes and the weightier cares of the
solid bourgeois. In a coach there is no police to check tongues, and
legislative assemblies have set the fashion of public discussion. When
a young man of twenty-two, like the one named Georges, is clever and
lively, he is much tempted, especially under circumstances like the
present, to abuse those qualities.

In the first place, Georges had soon decided that he was the superior
human being of the party there assembled. He saw in the count a
manufacturer of the second-class, whom he took, for some unknown reason,
to be a chandler; in the shabby young man accompanied by Mistigris,
a fellow of no account; in Oscar a ninny, and in Pere Leger, the fat
farmer, an excellent subject to hoax. Having thus looked over the
ground, he resolved to amuse himself at the expense of such companions.

“Let me see,” he thought to himself, as the coucou went down the hill
from La Chapelle to the plain of Saint-Denis, “shall I pass myself
off for Etienne or Beranger? No, these idiots don’t know who they are.
Carbonaro? the deuce! I might get myself arrested. Suppose I say I’m the
son of Marshal Ney? Pooh! what could I tell them?--about the execution
of my father? It wouldn’t be funny. Better be a disguised Russian prince
and make them swallow a lot of stuff about the Emperor Alexander. Or I
might be Cousin, and talk philosophy; oh, couldn’t I perplex ‘em! But
no, that shabby fellow with the tousled head looks to me as if he
had jogged his way through the Sorbonne. What a pity! I can mimic
an Englishman so perfectly I might have pretended to be Lord Byron,
travelling incognito. Sapristi! I’ll command the troops of Ali, pacha of
Janina!”

During this mental monologue, the coucou rolled through clouds of dust
rising on either side of it from that much travelled road.

“What dust!” cried Mistigris.

“Henry IV. is dead!” retorted his master. “If you’d say it was scented
with vanilla that would be emitting a new opinion.”

“You think you’re witty,” replied Mistigris. “Well, it _is_ like vanilla
at times.”

“In the Levant--” said Georges, with the air of beginning a story.

“‘Ex Oriente flux,’” remarked Mistigris’s master, interrupting the speaker.

“I said in the Levant, from which I have just returned,” continued
Georges, “the dust smells very good; but here it smells of nothing,
except in some old dust-barrel like this.”

“Has monsieur lately returned from the Levant?” said Mistigris,
maliciously. “He isn’t much tanned by the sun.”

“Oh! I’ve just left my bed after an illness of three months, from the
germ, so the doctors said, of suppressed plague.”

“Have you had the plague?” cried the count, with a gesture of alarm.
“Pierrotin, stop!”

“Go on, Pierrotin,” said Mistigris. “Didn’t you hear him say it was
inward, his plague?” added the rapin, talking back to Monsieur de
Serizy. “It isn’t catching; it only comes out in conversation.”

“Mistigris! if you interfere again I’ll have you put off into the road,”
 said his master. “And so,” he added, turning to Georges, “monsieur has
been to the East?”

“Yes, monsieur; first to Egypt, then to Greece, where I served under
Ali, pacha of Janina, with whom I had a terrible quarrel. There’s no
enduring those climates long; besides, the emotions of all kinds in
Oriental life have disorganized my liver.”

“What, have you served as a soldier?” asked the fat farmer. “How old are
you?”

“Twenty-nine,” replied Georges, whereupon all the passengers looked at
him. “At eighteen I enlisted as a private for the famous campaign of
1813; but I was present at only one battle, that of Hanau, where I was
promoted sergeant-major. In France, at Montereau, I won the rank of
sub-lieutenant, and was decorated by,--there are no informers here, I’m
sure,--by the Emperor.”

“What! are you decorated?” cried Oscar. “Why don’t you wear your cross?”

“The cross of ‘ceux-ci’? No, thank you! Besides, what man of any
breeding would wear his decorations in travelling? There’s monsieur,” he
said, motioning to the Comte de Serizy. “I’ll bet whatever you like--”

“Betting whatever you like means, in France, betting nothing at all,”
 said Mistigris’s master.

“I’ll bet whatever you like,” repeated Georges, incisively, “that
monsieur here is covered with stars.”

“Well,” said the count, laughing, “I have the grand cross of the Legion
of honor, that of Saint Andrew of Russia, that of the Prussian Eagle,
that of the Annunciation of Sardinia, and the Golden Fleece.”

“Beg pardon,” said Mistigris, “are they all in the coucou?”

“Hey! that brick-colored old fellow goes it strong!” whispered Georges
to Oscar. “What was I saying?--oh! I know. I don’t deny that I adore the
Emperor--”

“I served under him,” said the count.

“What a man he was, wasn’t he?” cried Georges.

“A man to whom I owe many obligations,” replied the count, with a silly
expression that was admirably assumed.

“For all those crosses?” inquired Mistigris.

“And what quantities of snuff he took!” continued Monsieur de Serizy.

“He carried it loose in his pockets,” said Georges.

“So I’ve been told,” remarked Pere Leger with an incredulous look.

“Worse than that; he chewed and smoked,” continued Georges. “I saw him
smoking, in a queer way, too, at Waterloo, when Marshal Soult took him
round the waist and flung him into his carriage, just as he had seized a
musket and was going to charge the English--”

“You were at Waterloo!” cried Oscar, his eyes stretching wide open.

“Yes, young man, I did the campaign of 1815. I was a captain at
Mont-Saint-Jean, and I retired to the Loire, after we were all
disbanded. Faith! I was disgusted with France; I couldn’t stand it. In
fact, I should certainly have got myself arrested; so off I went, with
two or three dashing fellows,--Selves, Besson, and others, who are now
in Egypt,--and we entered the service of pacha Mohammed; a queer sort of
fellow he was, too! Once a tobacco merchant in the bazaars, he is now
on the high-road to be a sovereign prince. You’ve all seen him in
that picture by Horace Vernet,--‘The Massacre of the Mameluks.’ What
a handsome fellow he was! But I wouldn’t give up the religion of my
fathers and embrace Islamism; all the more because the abjuration
required a surgical operation which I hadn’t any fancy for. Besides,
nobody respects a renegade. Now if they had offered me a hundred
thousand francs a year, perhaps--and yet, no! The pacha did give me a
thousand talari as a present.”

“How much is that?” asked Oscar, who was listening to Georges with all
his ears.

“Oh! not much. A talaro is, as you might say, a five-franc piece.
But faith! I got no compensation for the vices I contracted in that
God-forsaken country, if country it is. I can’t live now without smoking
a narghile twice a-day, and that’s very costly.”

“How did you find Egypt?” asked the count.

“Egypt? Oh! Egypt is all sand,” replied Georges, by no means taken
aback. “There’s nothing green but the valley of the Nile. Draw a
green line down a sheet of yellow paper, and you have Egypt. But those
Egyptians--fellahs they are called--have an immense advantage over us.
There are no gendarmes in that country. You may go from end to end of
Egypt, and you won’t see one.”

“But I suppose there are a good many Egyptians,” said Mistigris.

“Not as many as you think for,” replied Georges. “There are many more
Abyssinians, and Giaours, and Vechabites, Bedouins, and Cophs. But all
that kind of animal is very uninteresting, and I was glad enough to
embark on a Genoese polacca which was loading for the Ionian Islands
with gunpowder and munitions for Ali de Tebelen. You know, don’t
you, that the British sell powder and munitions of war to all the
world,--Turks, Greeks, and the devil, too, if the devil has money? From
Zante we were to skirt the coasts of Greece and tack about, on and off.
Now it happens that my name of Georges is famous in that country. I am,
such as you see me, the grandson of the famous Czerni-Georges who made
war upon the Porte, and, instead of crushing it, as he meant to do, got
crushed himself. His son took refuge in the house of the French consul
at Smyrna, and he afterwards died in Paris, leaving my mother pregnant
with me, his seventh child. Our property was all stolen by friends of
my grandfather; in fact, we were ruined. My mother, who lived on her
diamonds, which she sold one by one, married, in 1799, my step-father,
Monsieur Yung, a purveyor. But my mother is dead, and I have quarrelled
with my step-father, who, between ourselves, is a blackguard; he is
still alive, but I never see him. That’s why, in despair, left all to
myself, I went off to the wars as a private in 1813. Well, to go back
to the time I returned to Greece; you wouldn’t believe with what joy old
Ali Tebelen received the grandson of Czerni-Georges. Here, of course, I
call myself simply Georges. The pacha gave me a harem--”

“You have had a harem?” said Oscar.

“Were you a pacha with _many_ tails?” asked Mistigris.

“How is it that you don’t know,” replied Georges, “that only the Sultan
makes pachas, and that my friend Tebelen (for we were as friendly as
Bourbons) was in rebellion against the Padishah! You know, or you don’t
know, that the true title of the Grand Seignior is Padishah, and not
Sultan or Grand Turk. You needn’t think that a harem is much of a thing;
you might as well have a herd of goats. The women are horribly
stupid down there; I much prefer the grisettes of the Chaumieres at
Mont-Parnasse.”

“They are nearer, at any rate,” said the count.

“The women of the harem couldn’t speak a word of French, and that
language is indispensable for talking. Ali gave me five legitimate wives
and ten slaves; that’s equivalent to having none at all at Janina. In
the East, you must know, it is thought very bad style to have wives and
women. They have them, just as we have Voltaire and Rousseau; but who
ever opens his Voltaire or his Rousseau? Nobody. But, for all that, the
highest style is to be jealous. They sew a woman up in a sack and fling
her into the water on the slightest suspicion,--that’s according to
their Code.”

“Did you fling any in?” asked the farmer.

“I, a Frenchman! for shame! I loved them.”

Whereupon Georges twirled and twisted his moustache with a dreamy air.

They were now entering Saint-Denis, and Pierrotin presently drew up
before the door of a tavern where were sold the famous cheese-cakes of
that place. All the travellers got out. Puzzled by the apparent truth
mingled with Georges’ inventions, the count returned to the coucou when
the others had entered the house, and looked beneath the cushion for
the portfolio which Pierrotin told him that enigmatical youth had
placed there. On it he read the words in gilt letters: “Maitre Crottat,
notary.” The count at once opened it, and fearing, with some reason,
that Pere Leger might be seized with the same curiosity, he took out the
deed of sale for the farm at Moulineaux, put it into his coat pocket,
and entered the inn to keep an eye on the travellers.

“This Georges is neither more nor less than Crottat’s second clerk,”
 thought he. “I shall pay my compliments to his master, whose business it
was to send me his head-clerk.”

From the respectful glances of Pere Leger and Oscar, Georges perceived
that he had made for himself two fervent admirers. Accordingly, he now
posed as a great personage; paid for their cheese-cakes, and ordered
for each a glass of Alicante. He offered the same to Mistigris and his
master, who refused with smiles; but the friend of Ali Tebelen profited
by the occasion to ask the pair their names.

“Oh! monsieur,” said Mistigris’ master, “I am not blessed, like you,
with an illustrious name; and I have not returned from Asia--”

At this moment the count, hastening into the huge inn-kitchen lest his
absence should excite inquiry, entered the place in time to hear the
conclusion of the young man’s speech.

“--I am only a poor painter lately returned from Rome, where I went at
the cost of the government, after winning the ‘grand prix’ five years
ago. My name is Schinner.”

“Hey! bourgeois, may I offer you a glass of Alicante and some
cheese-cakes?” said Georges to the count.

“Thank you,” replied the latter. “I never leave home without taking my
cup of coffee and cream.”

“Don’t you eat anything between meals? How bourgeois, Marais, Place
Royale, that is!” cried Georges. “When he ‘blagued’ just now about his
crosses, I thought there was something in him,” whispered the Eastern
hero to the painter. “However, we’ll set him going on his decorations,
the old tallow-chandler! Come, my lad,” he added, calling to Oscar,
“drink me down the glass poured out for the chandler; that will start
your moustache.”

Oscar, anxious to play the man, swallowed the second glass of wine, and
ate three more cheese-cakes.

“Good wine, that!” said Pere Leger, smacking his lips.

“It is all the better,” said Georges, “because it comes from Bercy. I’ve
been to Alicante myself, and I know that this wine no more resembles
what is made there than my arm is like a windmill. Our made-up wines are
a great deal better than the natural ones in their own country. Come,
Pierrotin, take a glass! It is a great pity your horses can’t take one,
too; we might go faster.”

“Forward, march!” cried Pierrotin, amid a mighty cracking of whips,
after the travellers were again boxed up.

It was now eleven o’clock. The weather, which had been cloudy, cleared;
the breeze swept off the mists, and the blue of the sky appeared in
spots; so that when the coucou trundled along the narrow strip of road
from Saint-Denis to Pierrefitte, the sun had fairly drunk up the last
floating vapors of the diaphanous veil which swathed the scenery of that
famous region.

“Well, now, tell us why you left your friend the pacha,” said Pere
Leger, addressing Georges.

“He was a very singular scamp,” replied Georges, with an air that hid a
multitude of mysteries. “He put me in command of his cavalry,--so far,
so good--”

“Ah! that’s why he wears spurs,” thought poor Oscar.

“At that time Ali Tebelen wanted to rid himself of Chosrew pacha,
another queer chap! You call him, here, Chaureff; but the name is
pronounced, in Turkish, Cosserew. You must have read in the newspapers
how old Ali drubbed Chosrew, and soundly, too, faith! Well, if it
hadn’t been for me, Ali Tebelen himself would have bit the dust two days
earlier. I was at the right wing, and I saw Chosrew, an old sly-boots,
thinking to force our centre,--ranks closed, stiff, swift, fine movement
a la Murat. Good! I take my time; then I charge, double-quick, and cut
his line in two,--you understand? Ha! ha! after the affair was over, Ali
kissed me--”

“Do they do that in the East?” asked the count, in a joking way.

“Yes, monsieur,” said the painter, “that’s done all the world over.”

“After that,” continued Georges, “Ali gave me yataghans, and carbines,
and scimetars, and what-not. But when we got back to his capital he
made me propositions, wanted me to drown a wife, and make a slave of
myself,--Orientals are so queer! But I thought I’d had enough of it;
for, after all, you know, Ali was a rebel against the Porte. So I
concluded I had better get off while I could. But I’ll do Monsieur
Tebelen the justice to say that he loaded me with presents,--diamonds,
ten thousand talari, one thousand gold coins, a beautiful Greek girl for
groom, a little Circassian for a mistress, and an Arab horse! Yes, Ali
Tebelen, pacha of Janina, is too little known; he needs an historian.
It is only in the East one meets with such iron souls, who can nurse a
vengeance twenty years and accomplish it some fine morning. He had
the most magnificent white beard that was ever seen, and a hard, stern
face--”

“But what did you do with your treasures?” asked farmer Leger.

“Ha! that’s it! you may well ask that! Those fellows down there haven’t
any Grand Livre nor any Bank of France. So I was forced to carry off my
windfalls in a felucca, which was captured by the Turkish High-Admiral
himself. Such as you see me here to-day, I came very near being impaled
at Smyrna. Indeed, if it hadn’t been for Monsieur de Riviere, our
ambassador, who was there, they’d have taken me for an accomplice of Ali
pacha. I saved my head, but, to tell the honest truth, all the rest,
the ten thousand talari, the thousand gold pieces, and the fine weapons,
were all, yes all, drunk up by the thirsty treasury of the Turkish
admiral. My position was the more perilous because that very admiral
happened to be Chosrew pacha. After I routed him, the fellow had managed
to obtain a position which is equal to that of our Admiral of the
Fleet--”

“But I thought he was in the cavalry?” said Pere Leger, who had followed
the narrative with the deepest attention.

“Dear me! how little the East is understood in the French provinces!”
 cried Georges. “Monsieur, I’ll explain the Turks to you. You are a
farmer; the Padishah (that’s the Sultan) makes you a marshal; if you
don’t fulfil your functions to his satisfaction, so much the worse
for you, he cuts your head off; that’s his way of dismissing his
functionaries. A gardener is made a prefect; and the prime minister
comes down to be a foot-boy. The Ottomans have no system of promotion
and no hierarchy. From a cavalry officer Chosrew simply became a naval
officer. Sultan Mahmoud ordered him to capture Ali by sea; and he did
get hold of him, assisted by those beggarly English--who put their
paw on most of the treasure. This Chosrew, who had not forgotten the
riding-lesson I gave him, recognized me. You understand, my goose
was cooked, oh, brown! when it suddenly came into my head to claim
protection as a Frenchman and a troubadour from Monsieur de Riviere. The
ambassador, enchanted to find something to show him off, demanded that I
should be set at liberty. The Turks have one good trait in their nature;
they are as willing to let you go as they are to cut your head off;
they are indifferent to everything. The French consul, charming fellow,
friend of Chosrew, made him give back two thousand of the talari, and,
consequently, his name is, as I may say, graven on my heart--”

“What was his name?” asked Monsieur de Serizy; and a look of some
surprise passed over his face as Georges named, correctly, one of our
most distinguished consul-generals who happened at that time to be
stationed at Smyrna.

“I assisted,” added Georges, “at the execution of the Governor of
Smyrna, whom the Sultan had ordered Chosrew to put to death. It was one
of the most curious things I ever saw, though I’ve seen many,--I’ll tell
you about it when we stop for breakfast. From Smyrna I crossed to Spain,
hearing there was a revolution there. I went straight to Mina, who
appointed me as his aide-de-camp with the rank of colonel. I fought for
the constitutional cause, which will certainly be defeated when we enter
Spain--as we undoubtedly shall, some of these days--”

“You, a French soldier!” said the count, sternly. “You show
extraordinary confidence in the discretion of those who are listening to
you.”

“But there are no spies here,” said Georges.

“Are you aware, Colonel Georges,” continued the count, “that the Court
of Peers is at this very time inquiring into a conspiracy which has made
the government extremely severe in its treatment of French soldiers
who bear arms against France, and who deal in foreign intrigues for the
purpose of overthrowing our legitimate sovereigns.”

On hearing this stern admonition the painter turned red to his ears and
looked at Mistigris, who seemed dumfounded.

“Well,” said Pere Leger, “what next?”

“If,” continued the count, “I were a magistrate, it would be my duty to
order the gendarmes at Pierrefitte to arrest the aide-de-camp of Mina,
and to summon all present in this vehicle to testify to his words.”

This speech stopped Georges’ narrative all the more surely, because
at this moment the coucou reached the guard-house of a brigade of
gendarmerie,--the white flag floating, as the orthodox saying is, upon
the breeze.

“You have too many decorations to do such a dastardly thing,” said
Oscar.

“Never mind; we’ll catch up with him soon,” whispered Georges in the
lad’s ear.

“Colonel,” cried Leger, who was a good deal disturbed by the count’s
outburst, and wanted to change the conversation, “in all these countries
where you have been, what sort of farming do they do? How do they vary
the crops?”

“Well, in the first place, my good fellow, you must understand, they are
too busy cropping off each others’ heads to think much of cropping the
ground.”

The count couldn’t help smiling; and that smile reassured the narrator.

“They have a way of cultivating which you will think very queer. They
don’t cultivate at all; that’s their style of farming. The Turks and
the Greeks, they eat onions or rise. They get opium from poppies, and
it gives them a fine revenue. Then they have tobacco, which grows of
itself, famous latakiah! and dates! and all kinds of sweet things that
don’t need cultivation. It is a country full of resources and commerce.
They make fine rugs at Smyrna, and not dear.”

“But,” persisted Leger, “if the rugs are made of wool they must come
from sheep; and to have sheep you must have fields, farms, culture--”

“Well, there may be something of that sort,” replied Georges. “But their
chief crop, rice, grows in the water. As for me, I have only been along
the coasts and seen the parts that are devastated by war. Besides, I
have the deepest aversion to statistics.”

“How about the taxes?” asked the farmer.

“Oh! the taxes are heavy; they take all a man has, and leave him the
rest. The pacha of Egypt was so struck with the advantages of that
system, that, when I came away he was on the point of organizing his own
administration on that footing--”

“But,” said Leger, who no longer understood a single word, “how?”

“How?” said Georges. “Why, agents go round and take all the harvests,
and leave the fellahs just enough to live on. That’s a system that does
away with stamped papers and bureaucracy, the curse of France, hein?”

“By virtue of what right?” said Leger.

“Right? why it is a land of despotism. They haven’t any rights. Don’t
you know the fine definition Montesquieu gives of despotism. ‘Like the
savage, it cuts down the tree to gather the fruits.’ They don’t tax,
they take everything.”

“And that’s what our rulers are trying to bring us to. ‘Tax
vobiscum,’--no, thank you!” said Mistigris.

“But that is what we _are_ coming to,” said the count. “Therefore, those
who own land will do well to sell it. Monsieur Schinner must have seen
how things are tending in Italy, where the taxes are enormous.”

“Corpo di Bacco! the Pope is laying it on heavily,” replied Schinner.
“But the people are used to it. Besides, Italians are so good-natured
that if you let ‘em murder a few travellers along the highways they’re
contented.”

“I see, Monsieur Schinner,” said the count, “that you are not wearing
the decoration you obtained in 1819; it seems the fashion nowadays not
to wear orders.”

Mistigris and the pretended Schinner blushed to their ears.

“Well, with me,” said the artist, “the case is different. It isn’t on
account of fashion; but I don’t want to be recognized. Have the goodness
not to betray me, monsieur; I am supposed to be a little painter of
no consequence,--a mere decorator. I’m on may way to a chateau where I
mustn’t rouse the slightest suspicion.”

“Ah! I see,” said the count, “some intrigue,--a love affair! Youth is
happy!”

Oscar, who was writhing in his skin at being a nobody and having nothing
to say, gazed at Colonel Czerni-Georges and at the famous painter
Schinner, and wondered how he could transform himself into somebody. But
a youth of nineteen, kept at home all his life, and going for two weeks
only into the country, what could he be, or do, or say? However, the
Alicante had got into his head, and his vanity was boiling in his veins;
so when the famous Schinner allowed a romantic adventure to be guessed
at in which the danger seemed as great as the pleasure, he fastened his
eyes, sparkling with wrath and envy, upon that hero.

“Yes,” said the count, with a credulous air, “a man must love a woman
well to make such sacrifices.”

“What sacrifices?” demanded Mistigris.

“Don’t you know, my little friend, that a ceiling painted by so great a
master as yours is worth its weight in gold?” replied the count. “If the
civil list paid you, as it did, thirty thousand francs for each of
those rooms in the Louvre,” he continued, addressing Schinner, “a
bourgeois,--as you call us in the studios--ought certainly to pay
you twenty thousand. Whereas, if you go to this chateau as a humble
decorator, you will not get two thousand.”

“The money is not the greatest loss,” said Mistigris. “The work is
sure to be a masterpiece, but he can’t sign it, you know, for fear of
compromising _her_.”

“Ah! I’d return all my crosses to the sovereigns who gave them to me for
the devotion that youth can win,” said the count.

“That’s just it!” said Mistigris, “when one’s young, one’s loved; plenty
of love, plenty of women; but they do say: ‘Where there’s wife, there’s
mope.’”

“What does Madame Schinner say to all this?” pursued the count; “for I
believe you married, out of love, the beautiful Adelaide de Rouville,
the protegee of old Admiral de Kergarouet; who, by the bye, obtained for
you the order for the Louvre ceilings through his nephew, the Comte de
Fontaine.”

“A great painter is never married when he travels,” said Mistigris.

“So that’s the morality of studios, is it?” cried the count, with an air
of great simplicity.

“Is the morality of courts where you got those decorations of yours any
better?” said Schinner, recovering his self-possession, upset for the
moment by finding out how much the count knew of Schinner’s life as an
artist.

“I never asked for any of my orders,” said the count. “I believe I have
loyally earned them.”

“‘A fair yield and no flavor,’” said Mistigris.

The count was resolved not to betray himself; he assumed an air of
good-humored interest in the country, and looked up the valley of
Groslay as the coucou took the road to Saint-Brice, leaving that to
Chantilly on the right.

“Is Rome as fine as they say it is?” said Georges, addressing the great
painter.

“Rome is fine only to those who love it; a man must have a passion for
it to enjoy it. As a city, I prefer Venice,--though I just missed being
murdered there.”

“Faith, yes!” cried Mistigris; “if it hadn’t been for me you’d have been
gobbled up. It was that mischief-making tom-fool, Lord Byron, who
got you into the scrape. Oh! wasn’t he raging, that buffoon of an
Englishman?”

“Hush!” said Schinner. “I don’t want my affair with Lord Byron talked
about.”

“But you must own, all the same, that you were glad enough I knew how to
box,” said Mistigris.

From time to time, Pierrotin exchanged sly glances with the count,
which might have made less inexperienced persons than the five other
travellers uneasy.

“Lords, pachas, and thirty-thousand-franc ceilings!” he cried. “I seem
to be driving sovereigns. What pourboires I’ll get!”

“And all the places paid for!” said Mistigris, slyly.

“It is a lucky day for me,” continued Pierrotin; “for you know, Pere
Leger, about my beautiful new coach on which I have paid an advance of
two thousand francs? Well, those dogs of carriage-builders, to whom I
have to pay two thousand five hundred francs more, won’t take fifteen
hundred down, and my note for a thousand for two months! Those vultures
want it all. Who ever heard of being so stiff with a man in business
these eight years, and the father of a family?--making me run the risk
of losing everything, carriage and money too, if I can’t find before
to-morrow night that miserable last thousand! Hue, Bichette! They won’t
play that trick on the great coach offices, I’ll warrant you.”

“Yes, that’s it,” said the rapin; “‘your money or your strife.’”

“Well, you have only eight hundred now to get,” remarked the count,
who considered this moan, addressed to Pere Leger, a sort of letter of
credit drawn upon himself.

“True,” said Pierrotin. “Xi! xi! Rougeot!”

“You must have seen many fine ceilings in Venice,” resumed the count,
addressing Schinner.

“I was too much in love to take any notice of what seemed to me then
mere trifles,” replied Schinner. “But I was soon cured of that folly,
for it was in the Venetian states--in Dalmatia--that I received a cruel
lesson.”

“Can it be told?” asked Georges. “I know Dalmatia very well.”

“Well, if you have been there, you know that all the people at that end
of the Adriatic are pirates, rovers, corsairs retired from business, as
they haven’t been hanged--”

“Uscoques,” said Georges.

Hearing the right name given, the count, who had been sent by Napoleon
on one occasion to the Illyrian provinces, turned his head and looked at
Georges, so surprised was he.

“The affair happened in that town where they make maraschino,” continued
Schinner, seeming to search for a name.

“Zara,” said Georges. “I’ve been there; it is on the coast.”

“You are right,” said the painter. “I had gone there to look at the
country, for I adore scenery. I’ve longed a score of times to paint
landscape, which no one, as I think, understands but Mistigris, who
will some day reproduce Hobbema, Ruysdael, Claude Lorrain, Poussin, and
others.”

“But,” exclaimed the count, “if he reproduces one of them won’t that be
enough?”

“If you persist in interrupting, monsieur,” said Oscar, “we shall never
get on.”

“And Monsieur Schinner was not addressing himself to you in particular,”
 added Georges.

“‘Tisn’t polite to interrupt,” said Mistigris, sententiously, “but we
all do it, and conversation would lose a great deal if we didn’t scatter
little condiments while exchanging our reflections. Therefore, continue,
agreeable old gentleman, to lecture us, if you like. It is done in the
best society, and you know the proverb: ‘we must ‘owl with the wolves.’”

“I had heard marvellous things of Dalmatia,” resumed Schinner, “so I
went there, leaving Mistigris in Venice at an inn--”

“‘Locanda,’” interposed Mistigris; “keep to the local color.”

“Zara is what is called a country town--”

“Yes,” said Georges; “but it is fortified.”

“Parbleu!” said Schinner; “the fortifications count for much in my
adventure. At Zara there are a great many apothecaries. I lodged with
one. In foreign countries everybody makes a principal business of
letting lodgings; all other trades are accessory. In the evening, linen
changed, I sat in my balcony. In the opposite balcony I saw a woman; oh!
such a woman! Greek,--_that tells all_! The most beautiful creature in
the town; almond eyes, lids that dropped like curtains, lashes like a
paint-brush, a face with an oval to drive Raffaelle mad, a skin of the
most delicious coloring, tints well-blended, velvety! and hands, oh!--”

“They weren’t made of butter like those of the David school,” put in
Mistigris.

“You are always lugging in your painting,” cried Georges.

“La, la!” retorted Mistigris; “‘an ounce o’ paint is worth a pound of
swagger.’”

“And such a costume! pure Greek!” continued Schinner. “Conflagration of
soul! you understand? Well, I questioned my Diafoirus; and he told me
that my neighbor was named Zena. Changed my linen. The husband, an old
villain, in order to marry Zena, paid three hundred thousand francs to
her father and mother, so celebrated was the beauty of that beautiful
creature, who was truly the most beautiful girl in all Dalmatia,
Illyria, Adriatica, and other places. In those parts they buy their
wives without seeing them--”

“I shall not go _there_,” said Pere Leger.

“There are nights when my sleep is still illuminated by the eyes of
Zena,” continued Schinner. “The husband was sixty-nine years of age,
and jealous! not as a tiger, for they say of a tiger, ‘jealous as a
Dalmatian’; and my man was worse than A Dalmatian, one Dalmatian,--he
was three and a half Dalmatians at the very least; he was an Uscoque,
tricoque, archicoque in a bicoque of a paltry little place like Zara--”

“Horrid fellow, and ‘horrider bellow,’” put in Mistigris.

“Ha! good,” said Georges, laughing.

“After being a corsair, and probably a pirate, he thought no more
of spitting a Christian on his dagger than I did of spitting on the
ground,” continued Schinner. “So that was how the land lay. The old
wretch had millions, and was hideous with the loss of an ear some pacha
had cut off, and the want of an eye left I don’t know where. ‘Never,’
said the little Diafoirus, ‘never does he leave his wife, never for
a second.’ ‘Perhaps she’ll want your services, and I could go in your
clothes; that’s a trick that has great success in our theatres,’ I told
him. Well, it would take too long to tell you all the delicious moments
of that lifetime--to wit, three days--which I passed exchanging looks
with Zena, and changing linen every day. It was all the more violently
titillating because the slightest motion was significant and dangerous.
At last it must have dawned upon Zena’s mind that none but a Frenchman
and an artist was daring enough to make eyes at her in the midst of the
perils by which she was surrounded; and as she hated her hideous pirate,
she answered my glances with delightful ogles fit to raise a man to
the summit of Paradise without pulleys. I attained to the height of Don
Quixote; I rose to exaltation! and I cried: ‘The monster may kill me,
but I’ll go, I’ll go!’ I gave up landscape and studied the ignoble
dwelling of the Uscoque. That night, changed linen, and put on the most
perfumed shirt I had; then I crossed the street, and entered--”

“The house?” cried Oscar.

“The house?” echoed Georges.

“The house,” said Schinner.

“Well, you’re a bold dog,” cried farmer Leger. “I should have kept out
of it myself.”

“Especially as you could never have got through the doorway,” replied
Schinner. “So in I went,” he resumed, “and I found two hands stretched
out to meet mine. I said nothing, for those hands, soft as the peel of
an onion, enjoined me to silence. A whisper breathed into my ear, ‘He
sleeps!’ Then, as we were sure that nobody would see us, we went to
walk, Zena and I, upon the ramparts, but accompanied, if you please, by
a duenna, as hideous as an old portress, who didn’t leave us any more
than our shadow; and I couldn’t persuade Madame Pirate to send her away.
The next night we did the same thing, and again I wanted to get rid of
the old woman, but Zena resisted. As my sweet love spoke only Greek, and
I Venetian, we couldn’t understand each other, and so we quarrelled.
I said to myself, in changing linen, ‘As sure as fate, the next time
there’ll be no old woman, and we can make it all up with the language of
love.’ Instead of which, fate willed that that old woman should save
my life! You’ll hear how. The weather was fine, and, not to create
suspicion, I took a turn at landscape,--this was after our quarrel was
made up, you understand. After walking along the ramparts for some time,
I was coming tranquilly home with my hands in my pockets, when I saw the
street crowded with people. Such a crowd! like that for an execution. It
fell upon me; I was seized, garroted, gagged, and guarded by the police.
Ah! you don’t know--and I hope you never may know--what it is to be
taken for a murderer by a maddened populace which stones you and howls
after you from end to end of the principal street of a town, shouting
for your death! Ah! those eyes were so many flames, all mouths were
a single curse, while from the volume of that burning hatred rose the
fearful cry: ‘To death! to death! down with the murderer!’”

“So those Dalmatians spoke our language, did they?” said the count. “I
observe you relate the scene as if it happened yesterday.”

Schinner was nonplussed.

“Riot has but one language,” said the astute statesman Mistigris.

“Well,” continued Schinner, “when I was brought into court in presence
of the magistrates, I learned that the cursed corsair was dead, poisoned
by Zena. I’d liked to have changed linen then. Give you my word, I knew
nothing of _that_ melodrama. It seems the Greek girl put opium (a great
many poppies, as monsieur told us, grow about there) in the pirate’s
grog, just to make him sleep soundly and leave her free for a little
walk with me, and the old duenna, unfortunate creature, made a mistake
and trebled the dose. The immense fortune of that cursed pirate was
really the cause of all my Zena’s troubles. But she explained matters
so ingenuously that I, for one, was released with an injunction from the
mayor and the Austrian commissary of police to go back to Rome. Zena,
who let the heirs of the Uscoque and the judges get most of the old
villain’s wealth, was let off with two years’ seclusion in a convent,
where she still is. I am going back there some day to paint her
portrait; for in a few years, you know, all this will be forgotten. Such
are the follies one commits at eighteen!”

“And you left me without a sou in the locanda at Venice,” said
Mistigris. “And I had to get from Venice to Rome by painting portraits
for five francs apiece, which they didn’t pay me. However, that was my
halcyon time. I don’t regret it.”

“You can imagine the reflections that came to me in that Dalmatian
prison, thrown there without protection, having to answer to Austrians
and Dalmatians, and in danger of losing my head because I went twice to
walk with a woman. There’s ill-luck, with a vengeance!”

“Did all that really happen to you?” said Oscar, naively.

“Why shouldn’t it happen to him, inasmuch as it had already happened
during the French occupation of Illyria to one of our most gallant
officers of artillery?” said the count, slyly.

“And you believed that artillery officer?” said Mistigris, as slyly to
the count.

“Is that all?” asked Oscar.

“Of course he can’t tell you that they cut his head off,--how could he?”
 said Mistigris. “‘Dead schinners tell no tales.’”

“Monsieur, are there farms in that country?” asked Pere Leger. “What do
they cultivate?”

“Maraschino,” replied Mistigris,--“a plant that grows to the height of
the lips, and produces a liqueur which goes by that name.”

“Ah!” said Pere Leger.

“I only stayed three days in the town and fifteen in prison,” said
Schinner, “so I saw nothing; not even the fields where they grow the
maraschino.”

“They are fooling you,” said Georges to the farmer. “Maraschino comes in
cases.”

“‘Romances alter cases,’” remarked Mistigris.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Pierrotin’s vehicle was now going down the steep incline of the valley of Saint-Brice to the inn in the middle of that large village, where Pierrotin habitually stopped an hour to rest his horses and give them oats and water. It was about half-past one.

“Ha! here’s Pere Leger,” cried the inn-keeper when the coach pulled up. “Do you breakfast?”

“Always once a day,” said the fat farmer; “I’ll break a crust now.”

“Give us a good breakfast,” cried Georges, twirling his cane in a cavalier manner, which excited poor Oscar.

But that admiration turned to jealousy when he saw the gay adventurer pull a small straw case from a side-pocket, choose a light cigar, and smoke on the inn threshold while waiting for breakfast.

“Do you smoke?” he asked Oscar.

“Sometimes,” replied the ex-schoolboy, swelling his chest and assuming a jaunty air.

Georges presented the open case to Oscar and Schinner.

“Phew!” said the great painter; “ten-sous cigars!”

“The remains of those I brought back from Spain,” said the adventurer. “Do you breakfast here?”

“No,” said the artist. “I am expected at the chateau. Besides, I took something at the Lion d’Argent before starting.”

“And you?” asked Georges of Oscar.

“I have breakfasted,” replied Oscar.

Oscar would have given ten years of his life for boots and straps to his trousers. He sneezed, coughed, spat, and swallowed smoke with ill-disguised grimaces.

“You don’t know how to smoke,” said Schinner; “look at me!”

With a motionless face Schinner inhaled and let the smoke out through his nose without a contraction. Then he took another whiff, kept the smoke in his throat, removed the cigar, and let the smoke slowly and gracefully escape.

“There, young man,” said the great painter.

“Here, young man, here’s another way; watch this,” said Georges, imitating Schinner but swallowing the smoke and exhaling none.

“My parents believed they had educated me!” thought Oscar, trying to smoke with better grace.

His nausea was so strong he was thankful when Mistigris filched his cigar, remarking, as he smoked with evident satisfaction, “You haven’t any contagious diseases, I hope.”

Oscar would fain have punched his head.

“How he does spend money!” he said, looking at Colonel Georges. “Eight francs for Alicante and the cheese-cakes; forty sous for cigars; and his breakfast will cost him--”

“Ten francs at least,” replied Mistigris; “but that’s how things are. ‘Sharp stomachs make short purses.’”

“Come, Pere Leger, let us drink a bottle of Bordeaux together,” said Georges.

“Twenty francs for his breakfast!” cried Oscar; “in all, more than thirty-odd francs since we started!”

Killed by a sense of inferiority, Oscar sat on a stone post, lost in a reverie that did not allow him to perceive that his trousers, drawn up by his position, showed the junction between the old top of his stocking and the new “footing,” his mother’s handiwork.

“We are brothers in socks,” said Mistigris, pulling up his own trousers to show a similar effect—“‘By the footing, Hercules.’”

The count, standing with folded arms under the porte-cochere a little behind the travellers, laughed. However nonsensical these lads might be, the grave statesman envied their follies; he liked their bragging and enjoyed their lively chatter.

“Well, are you to have Les Moulineaux? I know you went to Paris to get the money for the purchase,” said the inn-keeper to Pere Leger, whom he had just taken to the stables to see a horse he wanted to sell. “It will be queer if you manage to fleece a peer of France and a minister of State like the Comte de Serizy.”

The person thus alluded to turned to look at the farmer without sign.

“I’ve done for him,” replied Pere Leger low.

“Good! I like to see those nobles fooled. If you should want twenty thousand francs or so, I’ll lend them to you--But Francois, the conductor of Touchard’s six o’clock coach, told me Monsieur Margueron was invited by the Comte de Serizy to dine with him today at Presles.”

“That was the plan of his Excellency, but we had our own little ways of thwarting it,” laughed the farmer.

“The count could appoint Monsieur Margueron’s son, and you haven’t any place to give—remember that,” said the inn-keeper.

“Of course I do; but if the count has the ministry on his side, I have King Louis XVIII.,” said Pere Leger low. “Forty thousand of his pictures on coin given to Moreau will enable me to buy Les Moulineaux for two hundred and sixty thousand, money down, before Monsieur de Serizy can. When he finds the sale is made, he’ll be glad enough to buy the farm for three hundred and sixty thousand, instead of letting me cut it up in small lots right in the heart of his property.”

“Well done, bourgeois!” cried the inn-keeper.

“Don’t you think that’s good play?” said Leger.

“Besides,” said the inn-keeper, “the farm is really worth that to him.”

“Yes; Les Moulineaux brings in to-day six thousand francs in rental. I’ll take another lease at seven thousand five hundred for eighteen years. Therefore it is really an investment at more than two and a half per cent. The count can’t complain. To avoid involving Moreau, he is himself to propose me as tenant; it gives him the air of acting for his master’s interests by finding nearly three per cent for his money, and a tenant who will pay well.”

“How much will Moreau make, in all?”

“Well, if the count gives him ten thousand francs for the transaction the matter will bring him fifty thousand—and well-earned, too.”

“After all, the count, so they tell me, doesn’t like Presles. And then he is so rich, what does it matter what it costs him?” said the inn-keeper. “I have never seen him, myself.”

“Nor I,” said Pere Leger. “But he must be intending to live there, or why restore the chateau for two hundred thousand francs? It is as fine now as the King’s own palace.”

“Well, well,” said the inn-keeper, “it was high time for Moreau to feather his nest.”

“Yes, for if the masters come there,” replied Leger, “they won’t keep their eyes in their pockets.”

The count lost not a word of this low-voiced conversation.

“Here I have actually found the proofs I was going down there to seek,” he thought, looking at the fat farmer as he entered the kitchen. “But perhaps,” he added, “it is only a scheme; Moreau may not have listened to it.”

So unwilling was he to believe his steward could lend himself to such a conspiracy.

Pierrotin came out to water his horses. The count, thinking the driver would likely breakfast with the farmer and the inn-keeper, feared some indiscretion.

“All these people combine against us,” he thought; “it is allowable to baffle them—Pierrotin,” he said low as the man passed, “I promised you ten louis to keep my secret; but if you continue to conceal my name (and remember, I shall know if you pronounce it, or make the slightest sign that reveals it to any one, here or at Isle-Adam, before tonight), I will give you tomorrow morning, on your return trip, the thousand francs you need to pay for your new coach. Therefore, by way of precaution,” added the count, striking Pierrotin, pale with happiness, on the shoulder, “don’t go in there to breakfast; stay with your horses.”

“Monsieur le comte, I understand; don’t be afraid! it relates to Pere Leger, of course.”

“It relates to every one,” replied the count.

“Make yourself easy. Come, hurry,” said Pierrotin moments later, putting his head into the kitchen. “We are late. Pere Leger, you know there’s a hill to climb; I’m not hungry, and I’ll drive on slowly; you can soon overtake me—it will do you good to walk a bit.”

“What a hurry you are in, Pierrotin!” said the inn-keeper. “Can’t you stay and breakfast? The colonel pays for the wine at fifty sous and has ordered a bottle of champagne.”

“I can’t. I’ve got a fish I must deliver by three o’clock for a great dinner at Stors; there’s no fooling with customers, or fishes, either.”

“Very good,” said Pere Leger to the inn-keeper. “You can harness that horse you want to sell me into the cabriolet; we’ll breakfast in peace and overtake Pierrotin, and I can judge of the beast as we go. We can go three in your jolter.”

To the count’s surprise, Pierrotin himself rebridled the horses. Schinner and Mistigris had walked on. Scarcely had Pierrotin overtaken the artists and mounted the hill from which Ecouen, the steeple of Mesnil, and surrounding forests came in sight, when the gallop of a horse and the jingling of a vehicle announced Pere Leger and the grandson of Czerni-Georges, who soon took their places in the coucou.

As Pierrotin drove down the narrow road to Moisselles, Georges, who had not ceased talking with the farmer about the hostess at Saint-Brice, suddenly exclaimed: “Upon my word, this landscape is not so bad, great painter, is it?”

“Pooh! you who have seen the East and Spain can’t really admire it.”

“I’ve two cigars left! If no one objects, will you help me finish them, Schinner? the little young man there seems to have found a whiff or two enough for him.”

Pere Leger and the count kept silence, which passed for consent.

Oscar, furious at being called a “little young man,” remarked as the others lighted their cigars:

“I am not the aide-de-camp of Mina, monsieur, and I have not yet been to the East, but I shall probably go there. The career my family destine me will spare me, I trust, the annoyances of travelling in a coucou before I reach your present age. When I once become a personage I shall know how to maintain my station.”

“‘Et caetera punctum!’” crowed Mistigris, imitating a young cock; which made Oscar’s delivery absurd, because he had just reached the age when the beard sprouts and the voice breaks. “‘What a chit for chat!’” added the rapin.

“Your family, young man, destine you to some career, do they?” said Georges. “Might I ask what it is?”

“Diplomacy,” replied Oscar.

Three bursts of laughter came from Mistigris, the great painter, and the farmer. The count could not help smiling. Georges was perfectly grave.

“By Allah!” he exclaimed, “I see nothing to laugh at in that. Though it seems to me, young man, your respectable mother is, at the present moment, not exactly in the social sphere of an ambassadress. She carried a handbag worthy of utmost respect, and wore shoe-strings which--”

“My mother, monsieur!” exclaimed Oscar indignantly. “That was the person in charge of our household.”

“‘Our household’ is a very aristocratic term,” remarked the count.

“Kings have households,” replied Oscar proudly.

A look from Georges repressed laughter; he contrived to make Mistigris and the painter understand that Oscar was a new mine of amusement.

“Monsieur is right,” said Schinner to the count, motioning to Oscar. “Well-bred people always talk of their ‘households’; it is only common persons like ourselves who say ‘home.’ For a man so covered with decorations--”

“‘Nunc my eye, nunc alii,’” whispered Mistigris.

“--you seem to know little of court language. I ask your future protection, Excellency,” added Schinner, turning to Oscar.

“I congratulate myself on having travelled with three such distinguished men,” said the count, “a painter already famous, a future general, and a young diplomatist who may some day recover Belgium for France.”

Having committed the odious crime of repudiating his mother, Oscar, furious, now resolved to make them pay attention.

“‘All is not gold that glitters,’” he began, eyes flaming.

“That’s not it,” said Mistigris. “‘All is not old that titters.’ You’ll never get on in diplomacy if you don’t know your proverbs better than that.”

“I may not know proverbs, but I know my way—”

“It must be far,” said Georges, “for I saw that person in charge of your household give you provisions enough for an ocean voyage: rolls, chocolate—”

“A special kind of bread and chocolate, yes, monsieur,” returned Oscar; “my stomach is too delicate to digest tavern victuals.”

“‘Victuals’ is a word as delicate and refined as your stomach,” said Georges.

“Ah! I like that word ‘victuals,’” cried the great painter.

“The word is all the fashion in the best society,” said Mistigris. “I use it myself at the cafe of the Black Hen.”

“Your tutor is, doubtless, some celebrated professor, isn’t he?—Monsieur Andrieux of the Academie Francaise, or Monsieur Royer-Collard?” asked Schinner.

“My tutor is or was the Abbe Loraux, now vicar of Saint-Sulpice,” replied Oscar, recollecting the confessor at his school.

“Well, you were right to take a private tutor,” said Mistigris. “‘Tuto, tutor, celeritus, and jocund.’ Of course, you will reward him well, your abbe?”

“Undoubtedly he will be made a bishop some day,” said Oscar.

“By your family influence?” inquired Georges gravely.

“We shall probably contribute to his rise, for the Abbe Frayssinous is constantly at our house.”

“Ah! you know the Abbe Frayssinous?” asked the count.

“He is under obligations to my father,” answered Oscar.

“Are you on your way to your estate?” asked Georges.

“No, monsieur; but I can say where I am going, if others are not. I am going to the Chateau de Presles, to the Comte de Serizy.”

“The devil! are you going to Presles?” cried Schinner, turning as red as a cherry.

“So you know his Excellency the Comte de Serizy?” said Georges.

Pere Leger turned to look at Oscar stupefied.

“Is Monsieur de Serizy at Presles?” he said.

“Apparently, as I am going there,” replied Oscar.

“Do you often see the count?” asked Monsieur de Serizy.

“Often,” replied Oscar. “I am a comrade of his son, who is about my age, nineteen; we ride nearly every day.”

“‘Aut Caesar, aut Serizy,’” said Mistigris sententiously.

Pierrotin and Pere Leger exchanged winks.

“Really,” said the count to Oscar, “I am delighted to meet a young man who can tell me about that personage. I want his influence on a serious matter, although it would cost him nothing to oblige me. It concerns a claim I wish to press on the American government. I should be glad to obtain information about Monsieur de Serizy.”

“Oh! if you want to succeed,” replied Oscar with a knowing look, “don’t go to him, but to his wife; he is madly in love with her; no one knows more than I do; but she can’t endure him.”

“Why not?” said Georges.

“The count has a skin disease which makes him hideous. Doctor Albert has tried in vain to cure it. The count would give half his fortune if he had a chest like mine,” said Oscar, swelling. “He lives a lonely life; gets up early and works from three to eight; after eight he takes his remedies—sulphur-baths, steam-baths, and such. His valet bakes him in a sort of iron box—for he hopes to be cured.”

“If he is such a friend of the King as they say he is, why doesn’t he get his Majesty to touch him?” asked Georges.

“The count has lately promised thirty thousand francs to a celebrated Scotch doctor who is coming to treat him,” continued Oscar.

“Then his wife can’t be blamed if she finds better—” said Schinner, trailing off.

“I should say so!” resumed Oscar. “The poor man is so shrivelled and old you would take him for eighty! He’s as dry as parchment, and, unluckily for him, he feels his position.”

“Most men would,” said Pere Leger.

“He adores his wife and dares not find fault with her,” pursued Oscar, rejoicing to have found a topic that engaged them. “He plays scenes with her that would make you die of laughing—exactly like Arnolphe in Moliere’s comedy.”

The count, horror-stricken, looked at Pierrotin. Finding the count silent, Pierrotin concluded Madame Clapart’s son was lying.

“So, monsieur,” continued Oscar, “if you want the count’s influence, I advise you to apply to the Marquis d’Aiglemont. If you get that former adorer of Madame de Serizy on your side, you will win husband and wife at one stroke.”

“Look here!” said the painter, “you seem to have seen the count without his clothes, are you his valet?”

“His valet!” cried Oscar.

“Hang it! people don’t tell such things about their friends in public conveyances,” exclaimed Mistigris. “As for me, I’m not listening; I’m deaf: ‘discretion plays the better part of adder.’”

“‘A poet is nasty and not fit,’ and so is a tale-bearer,” cried Schinner.

“Great painter,” said Georges sententiously, “learn this: you can’t say harm of people you don’t know. Now the little one here has proved, indubitably, that he knows his Serizy by heart. If he had told us about the countess, perhaps—?”

“Stop! not a word about the Comtesse de Serizy, young men,” cried the count. “I am a friend of her brother, the Marquis de Ronquerolles, and whoever attempts to speak disparagingly of the countess must answer to me.”

“Monsieur is right,” cried the painter; “no man should blaguer women.”

“God, Honor, and the Ladies! I believe in that melodrama,” said Mistigris.

“I don’t know the guerrilla chieftain, Mina, but I know the Keeper of the Seals,” continued the count, looking at Georges; “and though I don’t wear my decorations,” he added to the painter, “I prevent those who do not deserve them from obtaining any. And finally, let me say that I know so many persons that I even know Monsieur Grindot, the architect of Presles. Pierrotin, stop at the next inn; I want to get out a moment.”

Pierrotin hurried his horses through the village street of Moisselles, at the end of which was the inn where all travellers stopped. The short distance passed in silence.

“Where is that young fool going?” asked the count, drawing Pierrotin into the inn-yard.

“To your steward. He is the son of a poor lady who lives in the rue de la Cerisaie, to whom I often carry fruit and game from Presles. She is a Madame Husson.”

“Who is that man?” inquired Pere Leger of Pierrotin when the count had left him.

“I don’t know,” replied Pierrotin; “this is the first time I have driven him. I shouldn’t be surprised if he was that prince who owns Maffliers. He has just told me to leave him on the road near there; he doesn’t want to go on to Isle-Adam.”

“Pierrotin thinks he is the master of Maffliers,” said Pere Leger to Georges.

The three young fellows were now as dull as thieves caught; they dared not look at each other and considered the consequences of their fibs.

“This is what is called ‘suffering for license sake,’” said Mistigris.

“You see I did know the count,” said Oscar.

“Possibly. But you’ll never be an ambassador,” replied Georges. “When people want to talk in public conveyances, they ought to be careful, like me, to talk without saying anything.”

“That’s what speech is for,” remarked Mistigris.

The count returned to his seat and the coucou rolled on amid deepest silence.

“Well, my friends,” said the count when they reached the Carreau woods, “here we all are, as silent as if going to the scaffold.”

“‘Silence gives content,’” muttered Mistigris.

“The weather is fine,” said Georges.

“What place is that?” said Oscar, pointing to the chateau de Franconville, which produces a fine effect at that spot, backed by the noble forest of Saint-Martin.

“How is it,” cried the count, “that you, who say you go so often to Presles, do not know Franconville?”

“Monsieur knows men, not castles,” said Mistigris.

“Budding diplomatists have so much else to take their minds,” remarked Georges.

“Be so good as to remember my name,” replied Oscar, furious. “I am Oscar Husson, and ten years hence I shall be famous.”

After that bombastic speech, Oscar flung himself back in his corner.

“Husson of what, of where?” asked Mistigris.

“It is a great family,” replied the count. “Husson de la Cerisaie; monsieur was born beneath the steps of the Imperial throne.”

Oscar colored crimson to the roots of his hair and was penetrated with a dreadful foreboding.

They were about to descend the steep hill of La Cave, at the foot of which, in a narrow valley flanked by the forest of Saint-Martin, stands the magnificent chateau of Presles.

“Messieurs,” said the count, “I wish you every good fortune in your various careers. Monsieur le colonel, make your peace with the King of France; the Czerni-Georges ought not to snub the Bourbons. I have nothing to wish for you, my dear Monsieur Schinner; your fame is already won, and nobly won by splendid work. But you are much to be feared in domestic life, and I, being a married man, dare not invite you to my house. As for Monsieur Husson, he needs no protection; he possesses the secrets of statesmen and can make them tremble. Monsieur Leger is about to pluck the Comte de Serizy, and I can only exhort him to do it with a firm hand. Pierrotin, put me out here, and pick me up at the same place tomorrow,” added the count, who left the coach and took a path through the woods, leaving his companions confused and bewildered.

“He must be that count who has hired Franconville; that’s the path to it,” said Leger.

“If ever again,” said the false Schinner, “I am caught blague-ing in a public coach, I’ll fight a duel with myself. It was your fault, Mistigris,” giving his rapin a tap.

“All I did was help you out, and follow you to Venice,” said Mistigris; “but that’s always the way, ‘Fortune belabors the slave.’”

“Let me tell you,” said Georges to Oscar, “that if, by chance, that was the Comte de Serizy, I wouldn’t be in your skin for a good deal, healthy as you think it.”

Oscar, remembering his mother’s injunctions, which these words recalled, turned pale and came to his senses.

“Here you are, messieurs!” cried Pierrotin, pulling up at a fine iron gate.

“Here we are—where?” said the painter, Georges, and Oscar at once.

“Well, well!” exclaimed Pierrotin, “if that doesn’t beat all! Ah ca, monsieurs, have none of you been here before? Why, this is the chateau de Presles.”

“Oh, yes; all right, friend,” said Georges, recovering his audacity. “But I happen to be going on to Les Moulineaux,” he added, not wishing his companions to know he was really going to the chateau.

“You don’t say so? Then you are coming to me,” said Pere Leger.

“How so?”

“Why, I’m the farmer at Moulineaux. Hey, colonel, what brings you there?”

“To taste your butter,” said Georges, pulling out his portfolio.

“Pierrotin,” said Oscar, “leave my things at the steward’s. I am going straight to the chateau.”

Oscar plunged into a narrow path, not knowing where he was going.

“Hi! Monsieur l’ambassadeur,” cried Pere Leger, “that’s the way to the forest; if you really want to get to the chateau, go through the little gate.”

Thus compelled to enter, Oscar disappeared into the grand courtyard. While Pere Leger stood watching Oscar, Georges, utterly confounded by the discovery that the farmer was the present occupant of Les Moulineaux, slipped away so adroitly that when the fat countryman looked round for his colonel there was no sign of him.

The iron gates opened at Pierrotin’s demand, and he proudly drove in to deposit with the concierge the thousand and one utensils belonging to the great Schinner. Oscar was thunderstruck when he became aware that Mistigris and his master, the witnesses of his bravado, were to be installed in the chateau itself. In ten minutes Pierrotin had discharged the painter’s packages, the bundles of Oscar Husson, and the pretty little leather portmanteau, which he took from its nest of hay and confided mysteriously to the wife of the concierge. Then he drove out of the courtyard, cracking his whip, and took the road through the forest to Isle-Adam, his face beaming with the sly expression of a peasant who calculates his profits. Nothing was lacking now to his happiness; on the morrow he would have his thousand francs, and, as a consequence, his magnificent new coach.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Oscar, abashed, skulked behind a clump of trees in the courtyard, watching to see what became of his two traveling companions, when Monsieur Moreau suddenly appeared on the portico from the guard-room. He wore a long blue overcoat to his heels, yellowish leather breeches, top-boots, and carried a riding-whip.

“Ah! my boy, so here you are? How is the dear mamma?” he said, taking Oscar’s hand. “Good-day, messieurs,” he added to Mistigris and his master, who stepped forward. “You are, no doubt, the two painters Monsieur Grindot told me to expect.”

He whistled twice; the concierge came.

“Take these gentlemen to rooms 14 and 15. Madame Moreau will give you the keys. Go with them to show the way; make fires if necessary, and take up all their things. I have orders from Monsieur le comte,” he added addressing the young men, “to invite you to my table, messieurs; we dine at five, as in Paris. If you like hunting, you will find plenty to amuse you; I have a license from the Eaux et Forets; and we hunt over twelve thousand acres of forest, not counting our own domain.”

Oscar, the painter, and Mistigris exchanged glances, subdued; Mistigris murmured, “‘Veni, vidi, cecidi,—I came, I saw, I slaughtered.’”

Oscar followed the steward briskly through the park.

“Jacques,” said Moreau to one of his children they met, “run and tell your mother that little Husson has come, and say I must go to Les Moulineaux for a moment.”

The steward, about fifty, of medium height and a dark, bilious complexion, at first seemed threatening—blue eyes, a large crow-beaked nose, eyes set too close—but his large lips, face outline, and easy good-humor soon revealed kindness. Abrupt in speech and decided in tone, he impressed Oscar by the force of his penetration, likely born of affection for the boy. Trained by his mother to magnify the steward, Oscar had always felt small in Moreau’s presence; but arriving at Presles he felt a new fear, as if his protector might harm him.

“Well, my Oscar, you don’t look pleased to be here,” said the steward. “You’ll find plenty of amusement; you shall learn to ride and to shoot and hunt.”

“I don’t know any of those things,” Oscar replied stupidly.

“But I brought you here to learn them.”

“Mamma told me only to stay two weeks because of Madame Moreau.”

“Oh! we’ll see about that,” Moreau said, slightly wounded that his authority was doubted.

Moreau’s youngest son, an active twelve-year-old, ran up.

“Come,” said his father, “take Oscar to your mother.”

Moreau himself went by the shortest path to the gamekeeper’s house, between the park and the forest.

The steward’s pavilion had been built a few years before the Revolution. It stood in a large garden, one wall adjoining the chateau’s stable yard. Formerly its main entrance faced the village road, but after the count’s father bought it he closed that entrance and united the place with the estate.

Built of freestone in the Louis XV style—enough to say the exterior had stone drapery beneath the windows—on the ground floor it had a salon opening into a bedroom, and a dining-room connected with a billiard-room. These parallel rooms were separated by a staircase with a peristyle entrance-hall from which the two suites opened. The kitchen lay beneath the dining-room; the whole house stood ten steps above ground.

By placing her bedroom above, Madame Moreau turned the adjoining chamber into a boudoir. These two rooms were richly furnished with pieces from the chateau’s old furniture. The salon, hung with blue and white damask (formerly state-bed curtains), had ample portieres and window curtains lined with white silk. Pictures, plant-stands, modern upholstery, handsome lamps, and a rare cut-glass chandelier lent grandeur. A Persian rug covered the floor. The boudoir, thoroughly modern and arranged in the style of a tent with ropes of blue silk on gray background, had the classic divan with pillows and footstools. Plant-stands nurtured by the head-gardener displayed pyramids of bloom. The dining-room and billiard-room were mahogany-furnished.

Around the house the steward’s wife had laid out a beautiful garden opening into the great park. Groups of choice trees hid the offices and stables; she had replaced a shabby railing with a handsome iron gateway to improve the entrance.

The Moreaus cleverly concealed their dependence on the count: they seemed like rich, independent persons taking care of a friend’s property. The count and countess never came to Presles to check their pretensions. Perquisites granted by Monsieur de Serizy let them live in the abundance of country luxury: milk, eggs, poultry, game, fruits, flowers, forage, vegetables, wood—used in profusion. They bought only butcher’s meat, wines, and colonial supplies. The poultry-maid baked their bread; Moreau had paid his butcher with pigs from the farm, after reserving some for himself.

Once, the countess, always kind to her former maid, gave the steward’s wife a little travelling-carriage. Moreau repainted it and drove his wife about the country with two good farm horses. Besides these, Moreau had his saddle-horse. He farmed enough to keep the horses and servants, stacked three hundred tons of hay while accounting for only a hundred—making use of a vague permission from the count. He kept poultry, pigeons, and cattle at the estate’s cost, while stable manure fed the count’s gardens. These little appropriations had some ostensible pretext.

Madame Moreau employed a gardener’s daughter who served first as maid then as cook; the poultry-girl and dairy-maid helped in household work; a discharged soldier groomed horses and did heavy labor.

At Nerville, Chaumont, Maffliers, Nointel, and nearby, the steward’s wife was received by people who either didn’t know or pretended not to know her past. Moreau had performed many services: he induced his master to appoint a juge de paix at Beaumont and Isle-Adam, prevented the dismissal of a keeper-general of the Forests, and obtained the Legion of Honor for a cavalry-sergeant at Beaumont. Consequently no bourgeois festivity omitted Monsieur and Madame Moreau. The rector and the mayor of Presles played cards with them every evening. It is hard not to be hospitable after feathering one’s nest.

A pretty, affected woman (as many retired waiting-maids of great ladies become), Madame Moreau imported Paris fashions. She wore expensive boots and was rarely seen on foot, except in fine weather. Though her husband allowed but five hundred francs a year for her toilette, that sum is immense in the provinces if well spent. Madame Moreau, fair, rosy, and about thirty-six, still slender after three children, played the young girl and fancied herself a princess. She would have been furious if anyone called her “the steward’s wife at Presles”; she wished to be taken for the chateau’s mistress. In the villages she patronized people in the tone of a great lady. Her husband’s influence with the count prevented ridicule from the small bourgeoisie; among the peasants she was a personage.

Estelle—her name—did not take part in stewardship affairs beyond the domestic; she depended on Moreau to manage household and fortune. Confident in his means, she never dreamed this comfortable existence—seventeen years long—could be endangered. Yet when she heard of the count’s plan to restore the chateau she felt threatened and urged her husband to partner with Leger about Les Moulineaux so they might retire to Isle-Adam. She had no wish to return to a servant’s position before her former mistress.

The rancorous enmity between the Reyberts and the Moreaus sprang from a wound Madame de Reybert inflicted when Madame Moreau presumed precedence on arrival at Presles. Madame de Reybert reminded or informed the countryside of Madame Moreau’s former station; “waiting-maid” flew from lip to lip. The Moreaus’ envious acquaintances carped so that for four years the Reyberts, cut dead by Estelle, suffered animadversion, supporting themselves with thoughts of vengeance.

The Moreaus, friendly with Grindot the architect, had been told of the early arrival of two painters sent to finish the chateau decorations—the principal paintings just completed by Schinner. The great painter had recommended the artist accompanied by Mistigris. For two days Madame Moreau had been on the tiptoe of expectation, preparing to receive an artist who would be her guest and companion for weeks. Schinner and his wife had their apartment at the chateau, where, by the count’s orders, they were treated with the respect due to him. Grindot, staying at the steward’s house, showed such consideration for the great artist that neither steward nor his wife attempted familiarity. The noblest and richest in the neighborhood vied to pay attention to Schinner and his wife. Thus, to regain a little revenge, Madame Moreau resolved to praise the artist she expected and present him to her circle as Schinner’s equal.

For two days Estelle arrayed coquettishly, reserving her finest dress for Saturday, certain the artist would arrive for dinner. A pink gown in narrow stripes, a pink belt with a gold buckle, a velvet ribbon and cross at her throat, velvet bracelets on bare arms, bronze kid shoes, and thread stockings lent Parisian elegance. She wore a superb Leghorn bonnet trimmed with moss roses, under which her blond curls rippled.

After ordering a choice dinner and reviewing her rooms, she stood near a flower-bed in the chateau courtyard, holding a rose-colored parasol, intending to be seen as mistress of the house on the arrival of the Beaumont coach. Seeing that Pierrotin’s coach had merely left Mistigris’s queer packages with the concierge and apparently brought no passengers, Estelle retired disappointed, regretting her elaborate toilette. Like many dressed in their best, she felt only fit to sit idly in her salon awaiting the Beaumont coach, which left Paris at noon and passed about an hour after Pierrotin. She was in her apartment when the two artists walked up to the chateau, sent by Moreau himself to their rooms to dress for dinner. Guided by the gardener, they had heard of Moreau’s beauty and “rigged themselves up,” putting on their best suits before walking to the steward’s lodge, piloted by Jacques Moreau, the eldest son, a hardy youth in an English-style jacket.

“Mamma,” he said, “here are the two artists sent by Monsieur Schinner.”

Madame Moreau, agreeably surprised, rose, told her son to place chairs, and began to display her graces.

“Mamma, the Husson boy is with papa,” added the lad; “shall I fetch him?”

“You need not hurry; go and play with him,” she replied.

This “you need not hurry” signaled the boy’s unimportance to their hostess; but it also showed her step-motherly feeling. After seventeen years, she knew her husband’s attachment to Madame Clapart and little Husson and hated both so that Moreau had never before risked bringing Oscar to Presles.

“We are requested, my husband and myself,” she said to the artists, “to do you the honors of the chateau. We both love art, and, above all, artists,” she minced; “make yourselves at home. In the country, one should be at ease; one must feel wholly at liberty, or life is too insipid. We have already had Monsieur Schinner with us.”

Mistigris glanced slyly at his companion.

“You know him, of course?” Estelle asked.

“Who does not know him, madame?” said the painter.

“Knows him like his double,” Mistigris added.

“Monsieur Grindot told me your name,” Madame Moreau said to the painter. “But—”

“Joseph Bridau,” he replied, wondering what sort of woman she was.

Mistigris internally rebelled at her patronizing tone, but waited for a cue—one of those phrases artists seize to sketch the ridiculous. Estelle’s clumsy manners and an occasional revealing word betrayed her past. A single glance between the artists arranged a scheme to take her seriously on her own ground and enjoy the amusement.

“You say you love art, madame; perhaps you cultivate it successfully,” Bridau said.

“No. My education was commercial; but I have so profound and delicate a sense of art that Monsieur Schinner always asked me, when he had finished a piece, to give my opinion,” she answered.

“Didn’t he propose to ‘croquer’ you?” Bridau asked. “Painters are eager after handsome women.”

“What may you mean by such language?” she replied.

“In the studios we say croquer for sketching,” Mistigris explained insinuatingly, “and we are always wanting to croquer beautiful heads. That’s the origin of ‘She is pretty enough to eat.’”

“I was not aware of the origin,” she said with a sweet glance.

“My pupil here,” Bridau added, “Monsieur Leon de Lora, shows talent for portraiture. He’d be happy to leave you a souvenir by painting your charming head, madame.”

Bridau signaled Mistigris: “Come, sail in.” Leon slid to the sofa beside Estelle and took her hand, which she allowed.

“Oh! madame, if you’d offer a surprise to your husband and give me secret sittings I would surpass myself,” Leon cooed. “You are so beautiful, so fresh, so charming!”

“We must paint your dear children in arabesques,” Bridau interrupted.

“I would rather have them in the salon; but perhaps I am indiscreet,” she coquetted.

“Beauty, madame, is a sovereign whom all painters worship,” Bridau declared.

“They are both charming,” thought Madame Moreau. “Do you enjoy driving? Shall I take you through the woods after dinner in my carriage?”

“Oh! oh! oh!” cried Mistigris ecstatically. “Why, Presles will be our terrestrial paradise.”

“With an Eve, a fair, young, fascinating woman,” added Bridau.

As Estelle bridled, she was recalled by a hurried entrance.

“Madame!” cried her maid.

“Rosalie, who sent you?” she asked.

Rosalie whispered: “The count is at the chateau.”

“Has he asked for me?” said Estelle.

“No, madame; but he wants his trunk and the key of his apartment.”

“Then give them to him,” she said impatiently, hiding her real trouble.

“Mamma! here’s Oscar Husson,” said the youngest son, bringing in Oscar, who turned red seeing the two artists in evening dress.

“Oh! so you have come, my little Oscar,” Estelle said stiffly. “I hope you will now go and dress,” she added contemptuously. “Your mother, I presume, has not accustomed you to dine in such clothes as those.”

“Oh!” cried the cruel Mistigris, “a future diplomatist knows that ‘two coats are better than none.’”

“How do you mean, future diplomatist?” exclaimed Madame Moreau.

Poor Oscar had tears in his eyes as he looked between Joseph and Leon.

“Merely a joke in traveling,” Joseph replied to save Oscar’s feelings.

“The boy wanted to be funny like the rest of us, and he blagued, that’s all,” Mistigris said.

“Madame,” Rosalie returned, “his Excellency orders dinner for eight at six. What shall we do?”

During Estelle’s conference with her head-woman the two artists and Oscar watched in consternation.

“His Excellency! who is he?” said Joseph Bridau.

“Why, Monsieur le Comte de Serizy, of course,” replied Jacques.

“Could he have been the man in the coucou?” Leon asked.

“Oh!” Oscar cried, “the Comte always travels in his own carriage with four horses.”

“How did the Comte get here?” Joseph asked Madame Moreau when she returned, much discomfited.

“I cannot explain it,” she said. “I do not know what brought him—and Moreau not here!”

“His Excellency wishes Monsieur Schinner to come to the chateau,” said the gardener. “And he begs Monsieur Schinner to dine with him; also Monsieur Mistigris.”

“Done for!” cried the rapin laughing. “He whom we took for a bourgeois in the coucou was the count.”

Oscar nearly froze; his throat tightened.

“And you, who talked to him about his wife’s lovers and his skin diseases!” Mistigris turned on Oscar.

“What does he mean?” exclaimed Madame Moreau, puzzled, as the artists left laughing at Oscar’s expression.

Oscar remained dumb, confounded, hearing nothing though Madame Moreau questioned and shook him by the arm. She gained nothing and left him in the salon; Rosalie reappeared asking for linen and silver, begging she see the count’s orders executed. The household bustled; the master had fallen upon his house like a bombshell.

From the top of the hill near La Cave, where he left the coach, the count had taken the wood-path to the gamekeeper’s house. The keeper was amazed to see his master.

“Is Moreau here? I see his horse,” the count asked.

“No, monseigneur; he meant to go to Moulineaux before dinner and left his horse here while he went to the chateau.”

“If you value your place,” said the count, “take that horse and ride at once to Beaumont to deliver a note I shall write.”

He entered the lodge, wrote a line folded to prevent opening without detection, and gave it to the man as soon as he mounted.

“Not a word to anyone,” he said. “And as for you, madame,” he added to the keeper’s wife, “if Moreau comes for his horse, tell him I have taken it.”

The count crossed the park and entered the chateau through the iron gates. Worn by public life and emotions, the soul of a man who loves deeply remains sensitive to treachery. Monsieur de Serizy had felt such pain thinking Moreau had deceived him that he had wept like a young man; wounded, he staggered through his park. On the threshold of the inn, while that earlier conversation was still going on, he had thought of pardoning Moreau after a good reproof; but upon hearing Pere Leger’s revelations and considering the gossip, he judged Moreau less a conspirator than a tool—yet guilty of revealing secrets.

When Moreau arrived at the lodge and asked for his horse, the keeper’s wife said the count had taken it.

“Monsieur le comte!” cried Moreau. “Whom do you mean?”

“The Comte de Serizy, our master,” she replied. “He is probably at the chateau by this time,” anxious to be rid of the steward. Unable to understand, Moreau ran to the chateau, where he learned the count was dressing.

“Seven persons invited to dinner!” Rosalie cried when she saw him.

Moreau went through the offices to his house. He met the poultry-girl in an altercation with a handsome young man.

“Monsieur le comte particularly told me a colonel, an aide-de-camp of Mina,” insisted the girl.

“I am not a colonel,” replied Georges.

“Isn’t your name Georges?” asked the girl.

“What’s all this?” said the steward, intervening.

“Monsieur, my name is Georges Marest; I am the son of a rich ironmonger in the rue Saint-Martin; I come on business to Monsieur le Comte de Serizy from Maitre Crottat, a notary, whose second clerk I am.”

“And I,” said the girl, “am telling him that monseigneur said: ‘There’ll come a colonel named Czerni-Georges, aidede-camp to Mina; he’ll come by Pierrotin’s coach; if he asks for me, show him into the waiting-room.’”

“Evidently,” said the clerk, “the count is the traveler we took for a bourgeois in the coucou; if it hadn’t been for the politeness of a young man he’d have come as a rabbit.”

“A rabbit in Pierrotin’s coucou!” exclaimed Moreau and the girl.

“I’m sure of it from what she says,” Georges added.

“How so?” asked the steward.

“I blagué the travelers with stories of Egypt and Greece and Spain,” Georges explained. “Wearing spurs, I took myself out for a colonel: pure nonsense!”

“Tell me,” the steward said, “what did that traveler look like?”

“Face like a brick, snow-white hair, and black eyebrows.”

“That is he!”

“Then I’m lost!” cried Georges.

“Why?”

“Oh, I chaffed him about his decorations.”

“Pooh! he’s a good fellow; you probably amused him. Come at once to the chateau. I’ll go in and see his Excellency. Where did you say he left the coach?”

“At the top of the mountain.”

“I don’t know what to make of it!”

“After all,” Georges thought, “though I did blague him, I didn’t say anything insulting.”

“Why have you come here?” asked the steward.

“I’ve brought the deed of sale for the farm at Moulineaux, ready for signature.”

“Good heavens!” Moreau exclaimed, bewildered.

Moreau felt his heart beat painfully. After rapping on his master’s door he heard:—

“Is that you, Monsieur Moreau?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Come in.”

The count, dressed in white trousers and thin boots, a white waistcoat and black coat, wore the grand cross of the Legion on the right breast and the Golden Fleece on the left. He had arranged his hair himself, likely to impress Monsieur Margueron.

“Well, monsieur,” he said, seated, leaving Moreau standing, “we have not concluded that purchase from Margueron.”

“He asks too much.”

“Why is he not coming to dinner as I requested?”

“Monseigneur, he is ill.”

“Are you sure?”

“I have just come from there.”

“Monsieur,” the count said sternly, “what would you do with a man you trusted if, after seeing you dress wounds you desired secret, he should reveal your misfortunes and laugh at your malady with a strumpet?”

“I would thrash him,” Moreau answered.

“And if he betrayed your confidence and robbed you?”

“I would detect him and send him to the galleys.”

“Monsieur Moreau, listen. You have spoken of my infirmities to Madame Clapart, laughed at her house and, with her, over my attachment to the Comtesse de Serizy; her son, little Husson, told many matters about my treatment in a public conveyance at my presence. He dared calumniate my wife. Besides, Pere Leger, who was in the coach, revealed the plan by the notary at Beaumont, you, and he, concerning Les Moulineaux. If you went to Monsieur Margueron it was to tell him to feign illness. He is so little ill that he is coming here to dinner. Now, monsieur, I could pardon you having made two hundred and fifty thousand francs from your position in seventeen years—I can understand that. You might each time have asked me and I would have given it; but that you, who knew my toil for our country and my love for Madame de Serizy—that you should gossip before a boy, holding up my secrets and affections to ridicule—”

“Monseigneur!”

“It is unpardonable. To injure a man’s interest is one thing; to stab his heart is another! Oh! you do not know what you have done!”

The count put his head in his hands and was silent for a while.

“I leave you what you have gained,” he said after a time, “and I shall forget you. For my sake, for my dignity, and for your honor, we will part decently; I cannot forget what your father did for mine. You will explain the stewardship duties to Monsieur de Reybert, who succeeds you. Be calm, as I am. Give no opportunity for fools to talk. Above all, no recrimination or petty meanness. Though you no longer possess my confidence, behave with the decorum of well-bred persons. As for that miserable boy who wounded me to death, I will not have him sleep at Presles; send him to the inn; I will not answer for my temper if I see him.”

“I do not deserve such gentleness, monseigneur,” Moreau answered with tears. “Yes, you are right; if I had been utterly dishonest I should now be worth five hundred thousand francs instead of half. I offer to give you an account of my fortune with all details. But let me tell you what actually took place. It was from heart to heart that I spoke of you to Madame Clapart. As for my wife, I never said one word of these matters—”

“Enough,” said the count, conviction complete. “All is irrevocable. Put your affairs and mine in order. You can stay in the pavilion until October. Monsieur and Madame de Reybert will lodge in the chateau for now; endeavor to keep on terms with them, like well-bred persons who hate each other, but maintain appearances.”

They went downstairs; Moreau white as the count’s hair, the count calm and dignified.

During this interview the Beaumont coach, which left Paris at one, had stopped before the chateau gates and deposited Maitre Crottat, the notary, who, per the count’s orders, was shown into the salon where he found his clerk, subdued, and the two painters, all painfully self-conscious. Monsieur de Reybert, a crabbed fifty-year-old, was there with old Margueron and the notary of Beaumont holding a bundle of deeds.

Seeing the count in evening dress and orders, Georges Marest felt a twinge, Joseph Bridau quivered, but Mistigris, conscious of Sunday clothes and with nothing on his conscience, remarked loud enough:—

“Well, he looks a great deal better like that.”

“Little scamp,” said the count, catching him by the ear, “we are both in the decoration business. I hope you recognize your own work, my dear Schinner,” he added, pointing to the salon ceiling.

“Monseigneur,” the artist replied, “I did wrong to take such a celebrated name out of mere bravado; but this day will oblige me to do fine things for you, and so bring credit on my own name of Joseph Bridau.”

“You took up my defense,” said the count hastily; “I hope you will dine with me, as well as my lively friend Mistigris.”

“Your Excellency doesn’t know to what you expose yourself,” the saucy rapin said; “‘facilis descensus victuali,’ as we say at the Black Hen.”

“Bridau!” the minister cried struck by a thought. “Are you related to one of the devoted toilers under the Empire, the head of a bureau who fell a victim to his zeal?”

“His son, monseigneur,” replied Joseph, bowing.

“Then you are most welcome,” the count said, taking Bridau’s hand. “I knew your father; count on me as on—on an uncle in America,” he laughed. “But you are too young to have pupils of your own; to whom does Mistigris belong?”

“To my friend Schinner, who lent him to me,” Joseph answered. “Mistigris’ name is Leon de Lora. Monseigneur, if you knew my father, will you think of his other son, accused of plotting against the State and soon to be tried before the Court of Peers?”

“Ah! that’s true,” the count said. “Yes, I will think about it. As for Colonel Czerni-Georges, the friend of Ali Pacha, and Mina’s aide-de-camp—” he continued, walking up to Georges.

“He! that’s my second clerk!” cried Crottat.

“You are mistaken, Maitre Crottat,” the count assumed sternness. “A clerk who intends to be a notary does not leave important deeds in a diligence at the mercy of travelers; nor spend twenty francs between Paris and Moisselles; nor expose himself to be arrested as a deserter—”

“Monseigneur,” said Georges, “I may have amused myself with the bourgeois in the diligence, but—”

“Let his Excellency finish,” said the notary, digging his elbow into his clerk’s ribs.

“A notary,” the count continued, “should practice discretion and caution; he should be incapable of such a blunder as taking a peer of France for a tallow-chandler—”

“I am willing to be blamed for my faults,” Georges said; “but I never left my deeds—”

“Now you are committing the fault of contradicting a minister, a gentleman, an old man, and a client,” the count said. “Give me that deed of sale.”

Georges turned papers in his portfolio.

“That will do; don’t disarrange those papers,” the count said, taking the deed from his pocket. “Here is what you seek.”

Crottat turned it back and forth, astonished to receive it from his client’s hands.

“What does this mean, monsieur?” he asked Georges.

“If I had not taken it,” said the count, “Pere Leger—who showed by his agricultural questions he minds his business—might have seized that paper and guessed my purpose. You must dine with me on condition you describe the execution of the Muslim of Smyrna, and finish the memoirs of some client you know so well.”

“Schlague for blague!” Leon whispered to Bridau.

“Gentlemen,” the count said to the two notaries and Messieurs Margueron and de Reybert, “let us go into the next room and conclude this business before dinner, because, as my friend Mistigris would say: ‘Qui esurit constentit.’”

“Well, he is very good-natured,” Leon said to Georges after the count left the room.

“Yes, he may be,” Georges replied, “but my master isn’t; he’ll request me to blaguer elsewhere.”

“Never mind, you like travel,” said Bridau.

“What a dressing that boy will get from Monsieur and Madame Moreau!” cried Mistigris.

“Little idiot!” said Georges. “If not for him the count would have been amused. Well, the lesson is good; if ever again I’m caught bragging in a public coach—”

“It is stupid,” Joseph said.

“And common,” Mistigris added. “‘Vulgarity is the brother of pretension.’”

While the sale was settled between Monsieur Margueron and the Comte de Serizy, assisted by their notaries and Monsieur de Reybert, the ex-steward walked slowly to his house, entered the salon, and sat down without noticing anything. Little Husson slipped into a corner, frightened by the steward’s livid face.

“Eh! my friend!” Estelle said, coming in tired. “What is the matter?”

“My dear, we are lost—lost beyond recovery. I am no longer steward of Presles, no longer in the count’s confidence.”

“Why not?”

“Pere Leger, who was in Pierrotin’s coach, told the count all about Les Moulineaux. But that is not what cost me his favor.”

“What then?”

“Oscar spoke ill of the countess, and told of the count’s diseases.”

“Oscar!” cried Madame Moreau. “Ah! your sin is found out. It was well worth while to warm that young serpent in your bosom. How often I have told you—”

“Enough!” Moreau said in a strained voice.

At that moment they discovered Oscar cowering. Moreau swooped on the lad, seized him by the collar, dragged him to a window. “Speak! what did you say to monseigneur in that coach? What demon let loose your tongue, you who keep a doltish silence whenever I speak to you? Why did you do it?” he cried violently.

Too bewildered to weep, Oscar was dumb and motionless.

“Come with me and beg his Excellency’s pardon,” said Moreau.

“As if his Excellency cares a little for a toad like that!” cried the furious Estelle.

“Come, I say, to the chateau,” repeated Moreau.

Oscar collapsed like an inert mass.

“Come!” cried Moreau, his anger rising.

“No! no! mercy!” Oscar cried, unable to submit to a torture worse than death.

Moreau seized the lad by his coat and dragged him through the yards, which rang with Oscar’s outcries and sobs. He hauled him up the portico and, with an arm made powerful by fury, flung him, bellowing and rigid, into the salon at the very feet of the count, who, having completed the purchase, was about to leave the salon for the dining-room with his guests.

“On your knees, wretched boy! and ask pardon of him who gave food to your mind by obtaining your scholarship.”

Oscar, face to the ground, foamed with rage and said nothing. The spectators were shocked. Moreau seemed out of his senses; his face crimson and bloodshot.

“This young man is a mere lump of vanity,” the count said after waiting for Oscar’s excuses. “A proud man humbles himself because he sees grandeur in a certain self-abasement. I fear you will never make much of that lad.”

So saying, his Excellency passed on. Moreau took Oscar home and ordered the horses immediately put to Madame Moreau’s caleche.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER VII. A MOTHER’S TRIALS


While the horses were being harnessed, Moreau wrote the following letter
to Madame Clapart:--

  My dear,--Oscar has ruined me. During his journey in Pierrotin’s
  coach, he spoke of Madame de Serizy’s behavior to his Excellency,
  who was travelling incognito, and actually told, to himself, the
  secret of his terrible malady. After dismissing me from my
  stewardship, the count told me not to let Oscar sleep at Presles,
  but to send him away immediately. Therefore, to obey his orders,
  the horses are being harnessed at this moment to my wife’s
  carriage, and Brochon, my stable-man, will take the miserable
  child to you to-night.

  We are, my wife and I, in a distress of mind which you may perhaps
  imagine, though I cannot describe it to you. I will see you in
  a few days, for I must take another course. I have three children,
  and I ought to consider their future. At present I do not know
  what to do; but I shall certainly endeavor to make the count aware
  of what seventeen years of the life of a man like myself is worth.
  Owning at the present moment about two hundred and fifty thousand
  francs, I want to raise myself to a fortune which may some day
  make me the equal of his Excellency. At this moment I feel within
  me the power to move mountains and vanquish insurmountable
  difficulties. What a lever is such a scene of bitter humiliation
  as I have just passed through! Whose blood has Oscar in his veins?
  His conduct has been that of a blockhead; up to this moment when I
  write to you, he has not said a word nor answered, even by a sign,
  the questions my wife and I have put to him. Will he become an
  idiot? or is he one already? Dear friend, why did you not instruct
  him as to his behavior before you sent him to me? How many
  misfortunes you would have spared me, had you brought him here
  yourself as I begged you to do. If Estelle alarmed you, you might
  have stayed at Moisselles. However, the thing is done, and there
  is no use talking about it.

  Adieu; I shall see you soon.

Your devoted servant and friend,

Moreau


At eight o’clock that evening, Madame Clapart, just returned from a walk
she had taken with her husband, was knitting winter socks for Oscar by
the light of a single candle. Monsieur Clapart was expecting a friend
named Poiret, who often came in to play dominoes, for never did he allow
himself to spend an evening at a cafe. In spite of his small means,
Clapart would not have kept his temper if placed amid the food and
company of a cafe, where inquisitive observation would have piqued him.

“I’m afraid Poiret came while we were out,” said Clapart to his wife.

“Why, no, my friend; the portress would have told us so when we came
in,” replied Madame Clapart.

“She may have forgotten it.”

“What makes you think so?”

“It wouldn’t be the first time she has forgotten things for us,--for God
knows how people without means are treated.”

“Well,” said the poor woman, to change the conversation and escape
Clapart’s cavilling, “Oscar must be at Presles by this time. How he will
enjoy that fine house and the beautiful park.”

“Oh! yes,” snarled Clapart, “you expect fine things of him; but, mark my
words, there’ll be squabbles wherever he goes.”

“Will you never cease to find fault with that poor child?” said the
mother. “What has he done to you? If some day we should live at our
ease, we may owe it all to him; he has such a good heart--”

“Our bones will be jelly long before that fellow makes his way in the
world,” cried Clapart. “You don’t know your own child; he is conceited,
boastful, deceitful, lazy, incapable of--”

“Why don’t you go to meet Poiret?” said the poor mother, struck to the
heart by the diatribe she had brought upon herself.

“A boy who has never won a prize at school!” continued Clapart.

To bourgeois eyes, obtaining school prizes meant the certainty of a fine
future for the fortunate child.

“Did you win any?” asked his wife. “Oscar stood second in philosophy.”

This remark imposed silence for a moment on Clapart; but presently he
began again.

“Besides, Madame Moreau hates him like poison, you know why. She’ll try
to set her husband against him. Oscar to step into his shoes as steward
of Presles! Why he’d have to learn agriculture, and know how to
survey.”

“He can learn.”

“He--that pussy cat! I’ll bet that if he does get a place down there,
it won’t be a week before he does some doltish thing which will make the
count dismiss him.”

“Good God! how can you be so bitter against a poor child who is full of
good qualities, sweet-tempered as an angel, incapable of doing harm to
any one, no matter who.”

Just then the cracking of a postilion’s whip and the noise of a carriage
stopping before the house was heard, this arrival having apparently put
the whole street into a commotion. Clapart, who heard the opening of
many windows, looked out himself to see what was happening.

“They have sent Oscar back to you in a post-chaise,” he cried, in a tone
of satisfaction, though in truth he felt inwardly uneasy.

“Good heavens! what can have happened to him?” cried the poor mother,
trembling like a leaf shaken by the autumn wind.

Brochon here came up, followed by Oscar and Poiret.

“What has happened?” repeated the mother, addressing the stable-man.

“I don’t know, but Monsieur Moreau is no longer steward of Presles, and
they say your son has caused it. His Excellency ordered that he should
be sent home to you. Here’s a letter from poor Monsieur Moreau, madame,
which will tell you all. You never saw a man so changed in a single
day.”

“Clapart, two glasses of wine for the postilion and for monsieur!” cried
the mother, flinging herself into a chair that she might read the fatal
letter. “Oscar,” she said, staggering towards her bed, “do you want to
kill your mother? After all the cautions I gave you this morning--”

She did not end her sentence, for she fainted from distress of mind.
When she came to herself she heard her husband saying to Oscar, as he
shook him by the arm:--

“Will you answer me?”

“Go to bed, monsieur,” she said to her son. “Let him alone, Monsieur
Clapart. Don’t drive him out of his senses; he is frightfully changed.”

Oscar did not hear his mother’s last words; he had slipped away to bed
the instant that he got the order.

Those who remember their youth will not be surprised to learn that
after a day so filled with events and emotions, Oscar, in spite of the
enormity of his offences, slept the sleep of the just. The next day he
did not find the world so changed as he thought it; he was surprised
to be very hungry,--he who the night before had regarded himself as
unworthy to live. He had only suffered mentally. At his age impressions
succeed one another so rapidly that the last weakens its predecessor,
however deeply the first may have been cut in. For this reason corporal
punishment, though many now oppose it, becomes necessary in certain
cases for certain children. It is, moreover, the most natural form of
retribution, for Nature herself employs it; she uses pain to impress a
lasting memory of her precepts. If to the shame of the preceding
evening the steward had joined some personal chastisement, perhaps the
lesson might have been complete. The discernment with which such
punishment must be administered is the greatest argument against it.
Nature is never mistaken; but the teacher is, and frequently.

Madame Clapart took pains to send her husband out, so that she might be
alone with her son the next morning. She was in a state to excite
pity. Her eyes, worn with tears; her face, weary with the fatigue of
a sleepless night; her feeble voice,--in short, everything about her
proved an excess of suffering she could not have borne a second time,
and appealed to sympathy.

When Oscar entered the room she signed to him to sit down beside her,
and reminded him in a gentle but grieved voice of the benefits they had
so constantly received from the steward of Presles. She told him that
they had lived, especially for the last six years, on the delicate
charity of Monsieur Moreau; and that Monsieur Clapart’s salary, also
the “demi-bourse,” or scholarship, by which he (Oscar) had obtained an
education, was due to the Comte de Serizy. Most of this would now cease.
Monsieur Clapart, she said, had no claim to a pension,--his period of
service not being long enough to obtain one. On the day when he was no
longer able to keep his place, what would become of them?

“For myself,” she said, “by nursing the sick, or living as a housekeeper
in some great family, I could support myself and Monsieur Clapart; but
you, Oscar, what could you do? You have no means, and you must earn
some, for you must live. There are but four careers for a young man
like you,--commerce, government employment, the licensed professions, or
military service. All forms of commerce need capital, and we have none
to give you. In place of capital, a young man can only give devotion and
his capacity. But commerce also demands the utmost discretion, and your
conduct yesterday proves that you lack it. To enter a government office,
you must go through a long probation by the help of influence, and you
have just alienated the only protector that we had,--a most powerful
one. Besides, suppose you were to meet with some extraordinary help, by
which a young man makes his way promptly either in business or in
the public employ, where could you find the money to live and clothe
yourself during the time that you are learning your employment?”

Here the mother wandered, like other women, into wordy lamentation: What
should she do now to feed the family, deprived of the benefits Moreau’s
stewardship had enabled him to send her from Presles? Oscar had
overthrown his benefactor’s prosperity! As commerce and a government
clerkship were now impossible, there remained only the professions of
notary and lawyer, either barristers or solicitors, and sheriffs. But
for those he must study at least three years, and pay considerable sums
for entrance fees, examinations, certificates, and diplomas; and here
again the question of maintenance presented itself.

“Oscar,” she said, in conclusion, “in you I had put all my pride, all my
life. In accepting for myself an unhappy old age, I fastened my eyes on
you; I saw you with the prospect of a fine career, and I imagined you
succeeding in it. That thought, that hope, gave me courage to face the
privations I have endured for six years in order to carry you through
school, where you have cost me, in spite of the scholarship, between
seven and eight hundred francs a year. Now that my hope is vanishing,
your future terrifies me. I cannot take one penny from Monsieur
Clapart’s salary for my son. What can you do? You are not strong enough
to mathematics to enter any of the technical schools; and, besides,
where could I get the three thousand francs board-money which they
extract? This is life as it is, my child. You are eighteen, you are
strong. Enlist in the army; it is your only means, that I can see, to
earn your bread.”

Oscar knew as yet nothing whatever of life. Like all children who have
been kept from a knowledge of the trials and poverty of the home, he
was ignorant of the necessity of earning his living. The word “commerce”
presented no idea whatever to his mind; “public employment” said almost
as little, for he saw no results of it. He listened, therefore, with
a submissive air, which he tried to make humble, to his mother’s
exhortations, but they were lost in the void, and did not reach his
mind. Nevertheless, the word “army,” the thought of being a soldier, and
the sight of his mother’s tears did at last make him cry. No sooner
did Madame Clapart see the drops coursing down his cheeks than she felt
herself helpless, and, like most mothers in such cases, she began the
peroration which terminates these scenes,--scenes in which they suffer
their own anguish and that of their children also.

“Well, Oscar, promise me that you will be more discreet in
future,--that you will not talk heedlessly any more, but will strive to
repress your silly vanity,” et cetera, et cetera.

Oscar of course promised all his mother asked him to promise, and then,
after gently drawing him to her, Madame Clapart ended by kissing him to
console him for being scolded.

“In future,” she said, “you will listen to your mother, and will follow
her advice; for a mother can give nothing but good counsel to her child.
We will go and see your uncle Cardot; that is our last hope. Cardot
owed a great deal to your father, who gave him his sister, Mademoiselle
Husson, with an enormous dowry for those days, which enabled him to make
a large fortune in the silk trade. I think he might, perhaps, place
you with Monsieur Camusot, his successor and son-in-law, in the rue des
Bourdonnais. But, you see, your uncle Cardot has four children. He
gave his establishment, the Cocon d’Or, to his eldest daughter, Madame
Camusot; and though Camusot has millions, he has also four children by
two wives; and, besides, he scarcely knows of our existence. Cardot has
married his second daughter, Mariane, to Monsieur Protez, of the firm
of Protez and Chiffreville. The practice of his eldest son, the notary,
cost him four hundred thousand francs; and he has just put his second
son, Joseph, into the drug business of Matifat. So you see, your uncle
Cardot has many reasons not to take an interest in you, whom he sees
only four times a year. He has never come to call upon me here, though
he was ready enough to visit me at Madame Mere’s when he wanted to sell
his silks to the Emperor, the imperial highnesses, and all the great
people at court. But now the Camusots have turned ultras. The eldest son
of Camusot’s first wife married a daughter of one of the king’s ushers.
The world is mighty hump-backed when it stoops! However, it was a clever
thing to do, for the Cocon d’Or has the custom of the present court as
it had that of the Emperor. But to-morrow we will go and see your uncle
Cardot, and I hope that you will endeavor to behave properly; for, as I
said before, and I repeat it, that is our last hope.”

Monsieur Jean-Jerome-Severin Cardot had been a widower six years. As
head-clerk of the Cocon d’Or, one of the oldest firms in Paris, he had
bought the establishment in 1793, at a time when the heads of the house
were ruined by the maximum; and the money of Mademoiselle Husson’s
dowry had enabled him to do this, and so make a fortune that was almost
colossal in ten years. To establish his children richly during his
lifetime, he had conceived the idea of buying an annuity for himself and
his wife with three hundred thousand francs, which gave him an income
of thirty thousand francs a year. He then divided his capital into three
shares of four hundred thousand francs each, which he gave to three
of his children,--the Cocon d’Or, given to his eldest daughter on her
marriage, being the equivalent of a fourth share. Thus the worthy man,
who was now nearly seventy years old, could spend his thirty thousand a
year as he pleased, without feeling that he injured the prospects of
his children, all finely provided for, whose attentions and proofs of
affection were, moreover, not prompted by self-interest.

Uncle Cardot lived at Belleville, in one of the first houses above
the Courtille. He there occupied, on the first floor, an apartment
overlooking the valley of the Seine, with a southern exposure, and the
exclusive enjoyment of a large garden, for the sum of a thousand francs
a year. He troubled himself not at all about the three or four other
tenants of the same vast country-house. Certain, through a long lease,
of ending his days there, he lived rather plainly, served by an old cook
and the former maid of the late Madame Cardot,--both of whom expected
to reap an annuity of some six hundred francs apiece on the old man’s
death. These two women took the utmost care of him, and were all the more
interested in doing so because no one was ever less fussy or less
fault-finding than he. The apartment, furnished by the late Madame
Cardot, had remained in the same condition for the last six years,--the
old man being perfectly contented with it. He spent in all not more than
three thousand francs a year there; for he dined in Paris five days
in the week, and returned home at midnight in a hackney-coach, which
belonged to an establishment at Courtille. The cook had only her
master’s breakfast to provide on those days. This was served at eleven
o’clock; after that he dressed and perfumed himself, and departed for
Paris. Usually, a bourgeois gives notice in the household if he dines
out; old Cardot, on the contrary, gave notice when he dined at home.

This little old man--fat, rosy, squat, and strong--always looked, in
popular speech, as if he had stepped from a bandbox. He appeared in
black silk stockings, breeches of “pou-de-soie” (paduasoy), a white
pique waistcoat, dazzling shirt-front, a blue-bottle coat, violet silk
gloves, gold buckles to his shoes and his breeches, and, lastly, a
touch of powder and a little queue tied with black ribbon. His face
was remarkable for a pair of eyebrows as thick as bushes, beneath which
sparkled his gray eyes; and for a square nose, thick and long, which
gave him somewhat the air of the abbes of former times. His countenance
did not belie him. Pere Cardot belonged to that race of lively Gerontes
which is now disappearing rapidly, though it once served as Turcarets
to the comedies and tales of the eighteenth century. Uncle Cardot always
said “Fair lady,” and he placed in their carriages, and otherwise paid
attention to those women whom he saw without protectors; he “placed
himself at their disposition,” as he said, in his chivalrous way.

But beneath his calm air and his snowy poll he concealed an old age
almost wholly given up to mere pleasure. Among men he openly professed
epicureanism, and gave himself the license of free talk. He had seen
no harm in the devotion of his son-in-law, Camusot, to Mademoiselle
Coralie, for he himself was secretly the Mecaenas of Mademoiselle
Florentine, the first danseuse at the Gaiete. But this life and these
opinions never appeared in his own home, nor in his external conduct
before the world. Uncle Cardot, grave and polite, was thought to be
somewhat cold, so much did he affect decorum; a “devote” would have
called him a hypocrite.

The worthy old gentleman hated priests; he belonged to that great
flock of ninnies who subscribed to the “Constitutionnel,” and was much
concerned about “refusals to bury.” He adored Voltaire, though his
preferences were really for Piron, Vade, and Colle. Naturally, he
admired Beranger, whom he wittily called the “grandfather of the
religion of Lisette.” His daughters, Madame Camusot and Madame
Protez, and his two sons would, to use a popular expression, have been
flabbergasted if any one had explained to them what their father meant
by “singing la Mere Godichon.”

This long-headed parent had never mentioned his income to his children,
who, seeing that he lived in a cheap way, reflected that he had deprived
himself of his property for their sakes, and, therefore, redoubled
their attentions and tenderness. In fact, he would sometimes say to his
sons:--

“Don’t lose your property; remember, I have none to leave you.”

Camusot, in whom he recognized a certain likeness to his own nature,
and whom he liked enough to make a sharer in his secret pleasures, alone
knew of the thirty thousand a year annuity. But Camusot approved of the
old man’s ethics, and thought that, having made the happiness of his
children and nobly fulfilled his duty by them, he now had a right to end
his life jovially.

“Don’t you see, my friend,” said the former master of the Cocon d’Or,
“I might re-marry. A young woman would give me more children. Well,
Florentine doesn’t cost me what a wife would; neither does she bore me;
and she won’t give me children to lessen your property.”

Camusot considered that Pere Cardot gave expression to a high sense
of family duty in these words; he regarded him as an admirable
father-in-law.

“He knows,” thought he, “how to unite the interests of his children
with the pleasures which old age naturally desires after the worries of
business life.”

Neither the Cardots, nor the Camusots, nor the Protez knew anything
of the ways of life of their aunt Clapart. The family intercourse was
restricted to the sending of notes of “faire part” on the occasion
of deaths and marriages, and cards at the New Year. The proud Madame
Clapart would never have brought herself to seek them were it not for
Oscar’s interests, and because of her friendship for Moreau, the only
person who had been faithful to her in misfortune. She had never annoyed
old Cardot by her visits, or her importunities, but she held to him as
to a hope, and always went to see him once every three months and talked
to him of Oscar, the nephew of the late respectable Madame Cardot; and
she took the boy to call upon him three times during each vacation. At
each of these visits the old gentleman had given Oscar a dinner at the
Cadran-Bleu, taking him, afterwards, to the Gaiete, and returning him
safely to the rue de la Cerisaie. On one occasion, having given the boy
an entirely new suit of clothes, he added the silver cup and fork and
spoon required for his school outfit.

Oscar’s mother endeavored to impress the old gentleman with the idea
that his nephew cherished him, and she constantly referred to the cup
and the fork and spoon and to the beautiful suit of clothes, though
nothing was then left of the latter but the waistcoat. But such little
arts did Oscar more harm than good when practised on so sly an old fox
as uncle Cardot. The latter had never much liked his departed wife, a
tall, spare, red-haired woman; he was also aware of the circumstances of
the late Husson’s marriage with Oscar’s mother, and without in the least
condemning her, he knew very well that Oscar was a posthumous child. His
nephew, therefore, seemed to him to have no claims on the Cardot family.
But Madame Clapart, like all women who concentrate their whole being
into the sentiment of motherhood, did not put herself in Cardot’s place
and see the matter from his point of view; she thought he must certainly
be interested in so sweet a child, who bore the maiden name of his late
wife.

“Monsieur,” said old Cardot’s maid-servant, coming out to him as
he walked about the garden while awaiting his breakfast, after his
hairdresser had duly shaved him and powdered his queue, “the mother of
your nephew, Oscar, is here.”

“Good-day, fair lady,” said the old man, bowing to Madame Clapart, and
wrapping his white pique dressing-gown about him. “Hey, hey! how this
little fellow grows,” he added, taking Oscar by the ear.

“He has finished school, and he regretted so much that his dear uncle
was not present at the distribution of the Henri IV. prizes, at which
he was named. The name of Husson, which, let us hope, he will bear
worthily, was proclaimed--”

“The deuce it was!” exclaimed the little old man, stopping short. Madame
Clapart, Oscar, and he were walking along a terrace flanked by oranges,
myrtles, and pomegranates. “And what did he get?”

“The fourth rank in philosophy,” replied the mother proudly.

“Oh! oh!” cried uncle Cardot, “the rascal has a good deal to do to make
up for lost time; for the fourth rank in philosophy, well, it isn’t
Peru, you know! You will stay and breakfast with me?” he added.

“We are at your orders,” replied Madame Clapart. “Ah! my dear Monsieur
Cardot, what happiness it is for fathers and mothers when their children
make a good start in life! In this respect--indeed, in all others,” she
added, catching herself up, “you are one of the most fortunate fathers
I have ever known. Under your virtuous son-in-law and your amiable
daughter, the Cocon d’Or continues to be the greatest establishment of
its kind in Paris. And here’s your eldest son, for the last ten years
at the head of a fine practice and married to wealth. And you have such
charming little granddaughters! You are, as it were, the head of four
great families. Leave us, Oscar; go and look at the garden, but don’t
touch the flowers.”

“Why, he’s eighteen years old!” said uncle Cardot, smiling at this
injunction, which made an infant of Oscar.

“Alas, yes, he is eighteen, my good Monsieur Cardot; and after bringing
him so far, sound and healthy in mind and body, neither bow-legged nor
crooked, after sacrificing everything to give him an education, it would
be hard if I could not see him on the road to fortune.”

“That Monsieur Moreau who got him the scholarship will be sure to look
after his career,” said uncle Cardot, concealing his hypocrisy under an
air of friendly good-humor.

“Monsieur Moreau may die,” she said. “And besides, he has quarrelled
irrevocably with the Comte de Serizy, his patron.”

“The deuce he has! Listen, madame; I see you are about to--”

“No, monsieur,” said Oscar’s mother, interrupting the old man, who,
out of courtesy to the “fair lady,” repressed his annoyance at being
interrupted. “Alas, you do not know the miseries of a mother who, for
seven years past, has been forced to take a sum of six hundred francs a
year for her son’s education from the miserable eighteen hundred francs
of her husband’s salary. Yes, monsieur, that is all we have had to live
upon. Therefore, what more can I do for my poor Oscar? Monsieur Clapart
so hates the child that it is impossible for me to keep him in the
house. A poor woman, alone in the world, am I not right to come and
consult the only relation my Oscar has under heaven?”

“Yes, you are right,” said uncle Cardot. “You never told me of all this
before.”

“Ah, monsieur!” replied Madame Clapart, proudly, “you were the last
to whom I would have told my wretchedness. It is all my own fault;
I married a man whose incapacity is almost beyond belief. Yes, I am,
indeed, most unhappy.”

“Listen to me, madame,” said the little old man, “and don’t weep; it is
most painful to me to see a fair lady cry. After all, your son bears the
name of Husson, and if my dear deceased wife were living she would wish
to do something for the name of her father and of her brother--”

“She loved her brother,” said Oscar’s mother.

“But all my fortune is given to my children, who expect nothing from
me at my death,” continued the old man. “I have divided among them the
millions that I had, because I wanted to see them happy and enjoying
their wealth during my lifetime. I have nothing now except an annuity;
and at my age one clings to old habits. Do you know the path on which
you ought to start this young fellow?” he went on, after calling to
Oscar and taking him by the arm. “Let him study law; I’ll pay the
costs. Put him in a lawyer’s office and let him learn the business of
pettifogging; if he does well, if he distinguishes himself, if he likes
his profession and I am still alive, each of my children shall, when the
proper time comes, lend him a quarter of the cost of a practice; and I
will be security for him. You will only have to feed and clothe him. Of
course he’ll sow a few wild oats, but he’ll learn life. Look at me: I
left Lyon with two double louis which my grandmother gave me, and walked
to Paris; and what am I now? Fasting is good for the health. Discretion,
honesty, and work, young man, and you’ll succeed. There’s a great deal
of pleasure in earning one’s fortune; and if a man keeps his teeth
he eats what he likes in his old age, and sings, as I do, ‘La Mere
Godichon.’ Remember my words: Honesty, work, discretion.”

“Do you hear that, Oscar?” said his mother. “Your uncle sums up in three
words all that I have been saying to you. You ought to carve the last
word in letters of fire on your memory.”

“Oh, I have,” said Oscar.

“Very good,--then thank your uncle; didn’t you hear him say he would
take charge of your future? You will be a lawyer in Paris.”

“He doesn’t see the grandeur of his destiny,” said the little old man,
observing Oscar’s apathetic air. “Well, he’s just out of school. Listen,
I’m no talker,” he continued; “but I have this to say: Remember that
at your age honesty and uprightness are maintained only by resisting
temptations; of which, in a great city like Paris, there are many at
every step. Live in your mother’s home, in the garret; go straight to
the law-school; from there to your lawyer’s office; drudge night and
day, and study at home. Become, by the time you are twenty-two, a second
clerk; by the time you are twenty-four, head-clerk; be steady, and you
will win all. If, moreover, you shouldn’t like the profession, you
might enter the office of my son the notary, and eventually succeed
him. Therefore, work, patience, discretion, honesty,--those are your
landmarks.”

“God grant that you may live thirty years longer to see your fifth child
realizing all we expect from him,” cried Madame Clapart, seizing uncle
Cardot’s hand and pressing it with a gesture that recalled her youth.

“Now come to breakfast,” replied the kind old man, leading Oscar by the
ear.

During the meal uncle Cardot observed his nephew without appearing to do
so, and soon saw that the lad knew nothing of life.

“Send him here to me now and then,” he said to Madame Clapart, as he
bade her good-bye, “and I’ll form him for you.”

This visit calmed the anxieties of the poor mother, who had not hoped
for such brilliant success. For the next fortnight she took Oscar to
walk daily, and watched him tyrannically. This brought matters to the
end of October. One morning as the poor household was breakfasting on a
salad of herring and lettuce, with milk for a dessert, Oscar beheld with
terror the formidable ex-steward, who entered the room and surprised
this scene of poverty.

“We are now living in Paris--but not as we lived at Presles,” said
Moreau, wishing to make known to Madame Clapart the change in their
relations caused by Oscar’s folly. “I shall seldom be here myself; for
I have gone into partnership with Pere Leger and Pere Margueron of
Beaumont. We are speculating in land, and we have begun by purchasing
the estate of Persan. I am the head of the concern, which has a capital
of a million; part of which I have borrowed on my own securities. When I
find a good thing, Pere Leger and I examine it; my partners have each a
quarter and I a half in the profits; but I do nearly all the work, and
for that reason I shall be constantly on the road. My wife lives here,
in the faubourg du Roule, very plainly. When we see how the business
turns out, if we risk only the profits, and if Oscar behaves himself, we
may, perhaps, employ him.”

“Ah! my friend, the catastrophe caused by my poor boy’s heedlessness may
prove to be the cause of your making a brilliant fortune; for, really
and truly, you were burying your energy and your capacity at Presles.”

Madame Clapart then went on to relate her visit to uncle Cardot, in
order to show Moreau that neither she nor her son need any longer be a
burden on him.

“He is right, that old fellow,” said the ex-steward. “We must hold Oscar
in that path with an iron hand, and he will end as a barrister or a
notary. But he mustn’t leave the track; he must go straight through with
it. Ha! I know how to help you. The legal business of land-agents is
quite important, and I have heard of a lawyer who has just bought what
is called a “titre nu”; that means a practice without clients. He is a
young man, hard as an iron bar, eager for work, ferociously active.
His name is Desroches. I’ll offer him our business on condition that he
takes Oscar as a pupil; and I’ll ask him to let the boy live with him at
nine hundred francs a year, of which I will pay three, so that your son
will cost you only six hundred francs, without his living, in future.
If the boy ever means to become a man it can only be under a discipline
like that. He’ll come out of that office, notary, solicitor, or
barrister, as he may elect.”

“Come, Oscar; thank our kind Monsieur Moreau, and don’t stand there like
a stone post. All young men who commit follies have not the good fortune
to meet with friends who still take an interest in their career, even
after they have been injured by them.”

“The best way to make your peace with me,” said Moreau, pressing Oscar’s
hand, “is to work now with steady application, and to conduct yourself
in future properly.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Ten days later, Oscar was taken by Monsieur Moreau to Maitre Desroches, solicitor, newly established in the rue de Bethisy, in a vast apartment at the end of a narrow courtyard, for which he paid a relatively low price.

Desroches, twenty-six, born of poor parents and brought up severely by a stern father, had himself known Oscar’s condition. He felt an interest in him, though the kind he could take was restrained by his apparent harshness. The sight of this gaunt young man, with muddy skin and hair cropped like a clothes-brush, who spoke curtly and had a piercing eye and a gloomy vivacity, terrified the unhappy Oscar.

“We work here day and night,” said the lawyer from his armchair, behind a table piled with papers like Alps. “Monsieur Moreau, we won’t kill him; but he’ll have to go at our pace. Monsieur Godeschal!” he called.

Though it was Sunday, the head-clerk appeared, pen in hand.

“Monsieur Godeschal, here’s the pupil I told you of. Monsieur Moreau takes the liveliest interest in him. He will dine with us and sleep in the small attic next to your chamber. You will allot the exact time it takes to go to the law-school and back, so he does not lose five minutes on the way. You will see that he learns the Code and is proficient in his classes; that is to say, after he has done his work here, you will give him authors to read. In short, he is to be under your immediate direction, and I shall keep an eye on it. They want to make him what you have made yourself, a capable head-clerk, against the time when he can take such a place himself. Go with Monsieur Godeschal, my young friend; he’ll show you your lodging, and you can settle down in it. Did you notice Godeschal?” continued Desroches, speaking to Moreau. “There’s a fellow who, like me, has nothing. His sister Mariette, the famous danseuse, is laying up her money to buy him a practice in ten years. My clerks are young blades who have nothing but their ten fingers to rely upon. So we all, my five clerks and I, work as hard as a dozen ordinary fellows. But in ten years I’ll have the finest practice in Paris. In my office, business and clients are a passion, and that’s beginning to make itself felt. I took Godeschal from Derville, where he was only just made second clerk. He gets a thousand francs a year from me, and food and lodging. But he’s worth it; he is indefatigable. I love him, that fellow! He has managed to live, as I did when a clerk, on six hundred francs a year. What I care for above all is honesty, spotless integrity; and when it is practised in such poverty as that, a man’s a man. For the slightest fault of that kind a clerk leaves my office.”

“The lad is in a good school,” thought Moreau.

For two years Oscar lived in the rue de Bethisy, a den of pettifogging; if ever that superannuated expression was applicable to a lawyer’s office, it was so in this case. Under this petty and able supervision he was kept to regular hours and work with such rigidity that his life in Paris was that of a monk.

At five in the morning, in all weathers, Godeschal woke. He went down with Oscar to the office, where they always found their master up and working. Oscar then ran office errands and prepared his law-school lessons—prepared them elaborately; Godeschal, and often Desroches himself, pointed out authors to be looked through and difficulties to overcome. He was not allowed to leave a single section of the Code until he had thoroughly mastered it to the satisfaction of his chief and of Godeschal, who put him through preliminary examinations more searching and longer than those of the law-school. After classes, where he was kept only a short time, he returned to work in the office; occasionally he was sent to the Palais, but always under Godeschal’s thumb, till dinner. Dinner was his master’s—one dish of meat, one of vegetables, and a salad. Dessert was a piece of Gruyere cheese. After dinner, Godeschal and Oscar returned to the office and worked till night. Once a month Oscar breakfasted with his uncle Cardot, and spent Sundays with his mother. From time to time Moreau, when in the office about his own affairs, would take Oscar to dine in the Palais-Royal and to some theater in the evening. Oscar had been so snubbed by Godeschal and Desroches for attempts at elegance that he no longer gave a thought to his clothes.

“A good clerk,” Godeschal told him, “should have two black coats, one new, one old, a pair of black trousers, black stockings, and shoes. Boots cost too much. You can’t have boots till you are called to the bar. A clerk should never spend more than seven hundred francs a year. Good stout shirts of strong linen are what you want. Ha! when a man starts from nothing to reach fortune, he has to keep down to bare necessities. Look at Monsieur Desroches; he did what we are doing, and see where he is now.”

Godeschal preached by example. If he professed the strictest principles of honor, discretion, and honesty, he practised them without assumption; such action was the natural play of his soul, as walking and breathing were the play of his organs. Eighteen months after Oscar’s installation, the second clerk was, for the second time, slightly wrong in his accounts, comparatively unimportant. Godeschal said to him in presence of all the other clerks:

“My dear Gaudet, go away from here of your own free will, that it may not be said that Monsieur Desroches has dismissed you. You have been careless or absent-minded, and neither of those defects can pass here. The master shall know nothing about the matter; that is all that I can do for a comrade.”

At twenty Oscar became third clerk in the office. Though he earned no salary, he was lodged and fed, for he did the work of the second clerk. Desroches employed two chief clerks, and the second’s work was unremitting toil. By the end of his second year in the law-school Oscar knew more than most licensed graduates; he did the work at the Palais intelligently and argued some cases in chambers. Godeschal and Desroches were satisfied. And yet, though he now seemed sensible, he showed, from time to time, a hankering after pleasure and a suppressed desire to shine.

Moreau, satisfied with Oscar’s progress, relaxed his watchfulness; when, in July 1825, Oscar passed his examinations with a spotless record, the land-agent gave him money to dress elegantly. Madame Clapart, proud and happy, prepared his outfit splendidly.

In November, when the courts reopened, Oscar occupied the chamber of the second clerk and did that work wholly. He had a salary of eight hundred francs with board and lodging. Uncle Cardot, who had gone privately to Desroches to inquire about his nephew, promised Madame Clapart to look out for a practice for Oscar if he continued to do well.

In spite of these virtuous appearances, Oscar underwent a great inward strife. At times he thought of quitting a life so contrary to his tastes; he felt galley-slaves were happier. Galled by the collar of this iron system, wild desires seized him when he compared himself in the street with well-dressed young men. Sometimes he was driven toward women; then he resigned himself, only to fall into deeper disgust for life. Impelled by Godeschal’s example, he was forced rather than led into the rugged way.

Godeschal watched Oscar and, by principle, kept him from temptation. Generally the young clerk had so little money he could not give way to excess. During the last year Godeschal had made five or six pleasure parties with Oscar, defraying expenses, feeling the rope by which he tethered the young kid must be slackened. These “pranks,” as he called them, helped Oscar endure existence, for there was little amusement in breakfasting with uncle Cardot, and still less in seeing his mother, who lived even more penuriously than Desroches. Moreau could not be as familiar with Oscar as Godeschal could; perhaps Godeschal, sincere friend to young Husson, had been behind Moreau in safe efforts to initiate the poor youth into life’s mysteries. Oscar, grown prudent, had come to see the extent and character of the fault committed on that luckless journey; but his repressed fancies and youthful follies might still get the better of him. Nevertheless, the more knowledge he got of the world and its laws, the better his mind would form itself, and, provided Godeschal never lost sight of him, Moreau flattered himself that between them they could bring the son of Madame Clapart through in safety.

“How is he getting on?” asked the land-agent of Godeschal on his return from a journey which had kept him some months out of Paris.

“Always too much vanity,” replied Godeschal. “You give him fine clothes and fine linen, he wears the shirt-fronts of a stockbroker, and so my dainty coxcomb spends his Sundays in the Tuileries, looking out for adventures. What else can you expect? That’s youth. He torments me to present him to my sister, where he would see a pretty sort of society—actresses, ballet-dancers, elegant young fops, spendthrifts wasting fortunes! His mind, I’m afraid, is not fitted for law. He can talk well, though; and if we could make him a barrister he might plead cases that were carefully prepared for him.”

In November 1825, soon after Oscar had taken his new clerkship and was about to pass his licentiate examination, a new clerk arrived to take the place vacated by Oscar’s promotion.

This fourth clerk, Frederic Marest, intended to enter the magistracy and was in his third year at the law school. He was a fine young man of twenty-three, with about twelve thousand francs a year from a bachelor uncle’s death, and the son of Madame Marest, widow of a wealthy wood-merchant. This future magistrate, desirous to understand his vocation thoroughly, had placed himself in Desroches’ office to study procedure and train to be a head-clerk in two years. He hoped to do his “stage” in Paris to be prepared for functions a rich young man would not be refused. To see himself, by thirty, “procureur du roi” anywhere was his sole ambition. Though Frederic Marest was cousin-german to Georges Marest, Oscar did not connect this Marest with the grandson of Czerni-Georges.

“Messieurs,” said Godeschal at breakfast, addressing the clerks, “I announce the arrival of a new jurisconsult; and as he is rich, rishissime, we will, I hope, make him pay a glorious entrance-fee.”

“Forward, the book!” cried Oscar, nodding to the youngest clerk, “and pray let us be serious.”

The youngest clerk climbed like a squirrel along the shelves until he reached a register placed on the top shelf, where a thick layer of dust had settled.

“It is getting colored,” said the little clerk, showing the volume.

We must explain the perennial joke of this book, then much in vogue in legal offices. In a clerical life where work is the rule, amusement is treasured because it is rare; above all, a hoax or practical joke is enjoyed with delight. This custom helps explain Georges Marest’s behavior in the coucou. The gravest clerk is, at times, possessed with a craving for fun and quizzing. The instinct with which a set of young clerks will seize and develop a hoax is remarkable. The denizens of a studio and of a lawyer’s office are, in this line, superior to comedians.

In buying a practice without clients, Desroches began a new dynasty. This made a break in the usages relative to receiving new-comers. Moreover, Desroches, having taken an office where legal documents had never been scribbled, bought new tables and white boxes edged with blue. His staff was made up of clerks from other offices, without mutual ties, surprised to find themselves together. Godeschal, who had served his apprenticeship under Maitre Derville, was not the sort to allow the precious tradition of the “welcome” to be lost. This “welcome” is a breakfast every neophyte gives to the ancients of the office.

About the time Oscar arrived, during the first six months of Desroches’ installation, on a winter evening when the work had been finished quickly and the clerks warmed themselves before the fire preparatory to departure, Godeschal conceived and composed a Register “architriclino-basochien,” of the utmost antiquity, saved from the fires of the Revolution, and derived through the procureur of the Chatelet—Bordin, predecessor of Sauvaguest, from whom Desroches had bought his practice. The work, approved by the clerks, began with a search through dealers in old paper for a proper register—paper with an eighteenth-century mark, bound in parchment, and bearing the stamp of an order in council. Having found such a volume, it was left about in the dust, on the stove, on the ground, and in the “chamber of deliberations,” so it obtained a mouldiness to delight an antiquary, cracks of aged dilapidation, broken corners as though rats had gnawed them; the gilt edges were tarnished with surprising perfection. As soon as the book was prepared, entries were made. The following extracts show the purpose to which the office of Maitre Desroches devoted this register, the first sixty pages of which were filled with reports of fictitious cases. On the first page appeared as follows, in the legal spelling of the eighteenth century:

  In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so be it. This day, the feast of our lady Saincte-Geneviesve, patron saint of Paris, under whose protection have existed, since the year 1525 the clerks of this Practice, we the under-signed, clerks and sub-clerks of Maistre Jerosme-Sebastien Bordin, successor to the late Guerbet, in his lifetime procureur at the Chastelet, do hereby recognize the obligation under which we lie to renew and continue the register and the archives of installation of the clerks of this noble Practice, a glorious member of the Kingdom of Basoche, the which register, being now full in consequence of the many acts and deeds of our well-beloved predecessors, we have consigned to the Keeper of the Archives of the Palais for safe-keeping, with the registers of other ancient Practices; and we have ourselves gone, each and all, to hear mass at the parish church of Saint-Severin to solemnize the inauguration of this our new register.

  In witness whereof we have hereunto signed our names: Malin, head-clerk; Grevin, second-clerk; Athanase Feret, clerk; Jacques Heret, clerk; Regnault de Saint-Jean-d’Angely, clerk; Bedeau, youngest clerk and gutter-jumper.

  In the year of our Lord 1787.

  After the mass aforesaid was heard, we conveyed ourselves to Courtille, where, at the common charge, we ordered a fine breakfast; which did not end till seven o’clock the next morning.

This was marvellously engrossed. An expert would have said it was written in the eighteenth century. Twenty-seven reports of receptions of neophytes followed, the last in 1792. Then came a blank of fourteen years; after which the register began again, in 1806, with Bordin’s appointment as attorney before the first Court of the Seine. Here follows the deed proclaiming the reconstitution of the kingdom of Basoche:

  God in his mercy willed that, in spite of the fearful storms which have cruelly ravaged the land of France, now become a great Empire, the archives of the very celebrated Practice of Maitre Bordin should be preserved; and we, the undersigned, clerks of the very virtuous and very worthy Maitre Bordin, do not hesitate to attribute this unheard-of preservation, when all titles, privileges, and charters were lost, to the protection of Sainte-Genevieve, patron Saint of this office, and also to the reverence which the last of the procureurs of noble race had for all that belonged to ancient usages and customs. In the uncertainty of knowing the exact part of Sainte-Genevieve and Maitre Bordin in this miracle, we have resolved, each of us, to go to Saint-Etienne du Mont and there hear mass, which will be said before the altar of that Holy-Shepherdess who sends us sheep to shear, and also to offer a breakfast to our master Bordin, hoping that he will pay the costs.

  Signed: Oignard, first clerk; Poidevin, second clerk; Proust, clerk; Augustin Coret, sub-clerk.

  At the office.

  November, 1806.

  At three in the afternoon, the above-named clerks hereby return their grateful thanks to their excellent master, who regaled them at the establishment of the Sieur Rolland restaurateur, rue du Hasard, with exquisite wines of three regions, to wit: Bordeaux, Champagne, and Burgundy, also with dishes most carefully chosen, between the hours of four in the afternoon to half-past seven in the evening. Coffee, ices, and liqueurs were in abundance. But the presence of the master himself forbade the chanting of hymns of praise in clerical stanzas. No clerk exceeded the bounds of amiable gayety, for the worthy, respectable, and generous patron had promised to take his clerks to see Talma in “Brittanicus,” at the Theatre-Francais. Long life to Maitre Bordin! May God shed favors on his venerable pow! May he sell dear so glorious a practice! May the rich clients for whom he prays arrive! May his bills of costs and charges be paid in a trice! May our masters to come be like him! May he ever be loved by clerks in other worlds than this!

Here followed thirty-three reports of various receptions, differing in writing and inks, with quotations, signatures, and praises of cheer and wines, as though each were written and signed on the spot, “inter pocula.”

Finally, under date June 1822, when Desroches took the oath, appears this declaration:

  I, the undersigned, Francois-Claude-Marie Godeschal, called by Maitre Desroches to perform the difficult functions of head-clerk in a Practice where the clients have to be created, having learned through Maitre Derville, from whose office I come, of the existence of the famous archives architriclino-basochien, so celebrated at the Palais, have implored our gracious master to obtain them from his predecessor; for it has become of the highest importance to recover a document bearing date of the year 1786, which is connected with other documents deposited for safe-keeping at the Palais, the existence of which has been certified to by Messrs. Terrasse and Duclos, keepers of records, by the help of which we may go back to the year 1525, and find historical indications of the utmost value on the manners, customs, and cookery of the clerical race.

  Having received a favorable answer to this request, the present office has this day been put in possession of these proofs of the worship in which our predecessors held the Goddess Bottle and good living.

  In consequence thereof, for the edification of our successors, and to renew the chain of years and goblets, I, the said Godeschal, have invited Messieurs Doublet, second clerk; Vassal, third clerk; Herisson and Grandemain, clerks; and Dumets, sub-clerk, to breakfast, Sunday next, at the “Cheval Rouge,” on the Quai Saint-Bernard, where we will celebrate the victory of obtaining this volume which contains the Charter of our gullets.

  This day, Sunday, June 27th, were imbibed twelve bottles of twelve different wines, regarded as exquisite; also were devoured melons, “pates au jus romanum,” and a fillet of beef with mushroom sauce. Mademoiselle Mariette, the illustrious sister of our head-clerk and leading lady of the Royal Academy of music and dancing, having obligingly put at the disposition of this Practice orchestra seats for the performance of this evening, it is proper to make this record of her generosity. Moreover, it is hereby decreed that the aforesaid clerks shall convey themselves in a body to that noble demoiselle to thank her in person, and declare to her that on the occasion of her first lawsuit, if the devil sends her one, she shall pay the money laid out upon it, and no more.

  And our head-clerk Godeschal has been and is hereby proclaimed a flower of Basoche, and, more especially, a good fellow. May a man who treats so well be soon in treaty for a Practice of his own!

On this record were stains of wine, pates, and candle-grease. To exhibit the stamp of truth that the writers managed to put upon these records, here is Oscar’s own pretended reception:

  This day, Monday, November 25th, 1822, after a session held yesterday at the rue de la Cerisaie, Arsenal quarter, at the house of Madame Clapart, mother of the candidate-basochien Oscar Husson, we, the undersigned, declare that the repast of admission surpassed our expectations. It was composed of radishes, pink and black, gherkins, anchovies, butter and olives for hors-d’oeuvre; a succulent soup of rice, bearing testimony to maternal solicitude, for we recognized therein a delicious taste of poultry; indeed, by acknowledgment of the new member, we learned that the gibbets of a fine stew prepared by the hands of Madame Clapart herself had been judiciously inserted into the family soup-pot with a care that is never taken except in such households.

  Item: the said gibbets inclosed in a sea of jelly.

  Item: a tongue of beef with tomatoes, which rendered us all tongue-tied automatoes.

  Item: a compote of pigeons with caused us to think the angels had had a finger in it.

  Item: a timbale of macaroni surrounded by chocolate custards.

  Item: a dessert composed of eleven delicate dishes, among which we remarked (in spite of the tipsiness caused by sixteen bottles of the choicest wines) a compote of peaches of august and mirobolant delicacy.

  The wines of Roussillon and those of the banks of the Rhone completely effaced those of Champagne and Burgundy. A bottle of maraschino and another of kirsch did, in spite of the exquisite coffee, plunge us into so marked an oenological ecstasy that we found ourselves at a late hour in the Bois de Boulogne instead of our domicile, where we thought we were.

  In the statutes of our Order there is one rule which is rigidly enforced; namely, to allow all candidates for the privilege of Basoche to limit the magnificence of their feast of welcome to the length of their purse; for it is publicly notorious that no one delivers himself up to Themis if he has a fortune, and every clerk is, alas, sternly curtailed by his parents. Consequently, we hereby record with the highest praise the liberal conduct of Madame Clapart, widow, by her first marriage, of Monsieur Husson, father of the candidate, who is worthy of the hurrahs which we gave for her at dessert.

  To all of which we hereby set our hands.

  [Signed by all the clerks.]

Three clerks had already been deceived by the Book, and three real “receptions of welcome” were recorded in this imposing register.

The day after each arrival, the little sub-clerk laid the “Archives Architriclino-Basochiennes” upon the new-comer’s desk, and the clerks enjoyed the look on his face as he studied its facetious pages. Inter pocula each candidate learned the secret of the farce, and the revelation inspired him to hoax his successor.

We see why Oscar, now a participator in the hoax, called, “Forward, the book!”

Ten minutes later a handsome young man with a fine figure and pleasant face presented himself, asked for Monsieur Desroches, and gave his name without hesitation.

“I am Frederic Marest,” he said, “and I come to take the place of third clerk.”

“Monsieur Husson,” said Godeschal, “show monsieur his seat and tell him about the customs of the office.”

The next day the new clerk found the register on his desk. He read a few pages, began to laugh, said nothing to the assembled clerks, and laid the book down again.

“Messieurs,” he said at five o’clock, “I have a cousin who is head clerk of the notary Maitre Leopold Hannequin; I will ask his advice as to what I ought to do for my welcome.”

“That looks ill,” cried Godeschal when Frederic had gone, “he hasn’t the cut of a novice, that fellow!”

“We’ll get some fun out of him yet,” said Oscar.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER IX, LA MARQUISE DE LAS FLORENTINAS Y CABIROLOS

The following day, at two o’clock, a young man entered the office, whom Oscar recognized as Georges Marest, now head-clerk of the notary Hannequin.

“Ha! here’s the friend of Ali pacha!” he exclaimed.

“Hey! you here, Monsieur l’ambassadeur!” returned Georges, recognizing Oscar.

“So you know each other?” said Godeschal, addressing Georges.

“I should think so! We got into a scrape together,” replied Georges, “about two years ago. Yes, I had to leave Crottat and go to Hannequin in consequence of that affair.”

“What was it?” asked Godeschal.

“Oh, nothing!” replied Georges, at a sign from Oscar. “We tried to hoax a peer of France, and he bowled us over. Ah ca! so you want to jockey my cousin, do you?”

“We jockey no one,” replied Oscar, with dignity; “there’s our charter.”

And he presented the famous register, pointing to a place where sentence of banishment was passed on a refractory who was stated to have been forced, for acts of dishonesty, to leave the office in 1788.

Georges laughed as he looked through the archives.

“Well, well,” he said, “my cousin and I are rich, and we’ll give you a fete such as you never had before,--something to stimulate your imaginations for that register. To-morrow (Sunday) you are bidden to the Rocher de Cancale at two o’clock. Afterwards, I’ll take you to spend the evening with Madame la Marquise de las Florentinas y Cabirolos, where we shall play cards, and you’ll see the elite of the women of fashion. Therefore, gentleman of the lower courts,” he added, with notarial assumption, “you will have to behave yourselves, and carry your wine like the seigneurs of the Regency.”

“Hurrah!” cried the office like one man. “Bravo! very well! vivat! Long live the Marests!”

“What’s all this about?” asked Desroches, coming out from his private office. “Ah! is that you, Georges? I know what you are after; you want to demoralize my clerks.”

So saying, he withdrew into his own room, calling Oscar after him.

“Here,” he said, opening his cash-box, “are five hundred francs. Go to the Palais, and get from the registrar a copy of the decision in Vandernesse against Vandernesse; it must be served to-night if possible. I have promised a PROD of twenty francs to Simon. Wait for the copy if it is not ready. Above all, don’t let yourself be fooled; for Derville is capable, in the interest of his clients, to stick a spoke in our wheel. Count Felix de Vandernesse is more powerful than his brother, our client, the ambassador. Therefore keep your eyes open, and if there’s the slightest hitch come back to me at once.”

Oscar departed with the full intention of distinguishing himself in this little skirmish,--the first affair entrusted to him since his installation as second clerk.

After the departure of Georges and Oscar, Godeschal sounded the new clerk to discover the joke which, as he thought, lay behind this Marquise de las Florentinas y Cabirolos. But Frederic, with the coolness and gravity of a king’s attorney, continued his cousin’s hoax, and by his way of answering, and his manner generally, he succeeded in making the office believe that the marquise might really be the widow of a Spanish grandee, to whom his cousin Georges was paying his addresses. Born in Mexico, and the daughter of Creole parents, this young and wealthy widow was noted for the easy manners and habits of the women of those climates.

“She loves to laugh, she loves to sing, she loves to drink like me!” he said in a low voice, quoting the well-known song of Beranger. “Georges,” he added, “is very rich; he has inherited from his father (who was a widower) eighteen thousand francs a year, and with the twelve thousand which an uncle has just left to each of us, he has an income of thirty thousand. So he pays his debts, and gives up the law. He hopes to be Marquis de las Florentinas, for the young widow is marquise in her own right, and has the privilege of giving her titles to her husband.”

Though the clerks were still a good deal undecided in mind as to the marquise, the double perspective of a breakfast at the Rocher de Cancale and a fashionable festivity put them into a state of joyous expectation. They reserved all points as to the Spanish lady, intending to judge her without appeal after the meeting.

The Marquise de las Florentinas y Cabirolos was neither more nor less than Mademoiselle Agathe-Florentine Cabirolle, first danseuse at the Gaiete, with whom uncle Cardot was in the habit of singing “Mere Godichon.” A year after the very reparable loss of Madame Cardot, the successful merchant encountered Florentine as she was leaving Coulon’s dancing-class. Attracted by the beauty of that choregraphic flower (Florentine was then about thirteen years of age), he followed her to the rue Pastourel, where he found that the future star of the ballet was the daughter of a portress. Two weeks later, the mother and daughter, established in the rue de Crussol, were enjoying a modest competence. It was to this protector of the arts--to use the consecrated phrase--that the theatre owed the brilliant danseuse. The generous Maecenas made two beings almost beside themselves with joy in the possession of mahogany furniture, hangings, carpets, and a regular kitchen; he allowed them a woman-of-all-work, and gave them two hundred and fifty francs a month for their living. Pere Cardot, with his hair in “pigeon-wings,” seemed like an angel, and was treated with the attention due to a benefactor. To him this was the age of gold.

For three years the warbler of “Mere Godichon” had the wise policy to keep Mademoiselle Cabirolle and her mother in this little apartment, which was only ten steps from the theatre; but he gave the girl, out of love for the choregraphic art, the great Vestris for a master. In 1820 he had the pleasure of seeing Florentine dance her first “pas” in the ballet of a melodrama entitled “The Ruins of Babylon.” Florentine was then about sixteen. Shortly after this debut Pere Cardot became an “old screw” in the eyes of his protegee; but as he had the sense to see that a danseuse at the Gaiete had a certain rank to maintain, he raised the monthly stipend to five hundred francs, for which, although he did not again become an angel, he was, at least, a “friend for life,” a second father. This was his silver age.

From 1820 to 1823, Florentine had the experience of every danseuse of nineteen to twenty years of age. Her friends were the illustrious Mariette and Tullia, leading ladies of the Opera, Florine, and also poor Coralie, torn too early from the arts, and love, and Camusot. As old Cardot had by this time acquired five additional years, he had fallen into the indulgence of a semi-paternity, which is the way with old men towards the young talents they have trained, and which owe their success to them. Besides, where could he have found another Florentine who knew all his habits and likings, and with whom he and his friends could sing “Mere Godichon”? So the little old man remained under a yoke that was semi-conjugal and also irresistibly strong. This was the brass age for the old fellow.

During the five years of silver and gold Pere Cardot had laid by eighty thousand francs. The old gentleman, wise from experience, foresaw that by the time he was seventy Florentine would be of age, probably engaged at the Opera, and, consequently, wanting all the luxury of a theatrical star. Some days before the party mentioned by Georges, Pere Cardot had spent the sum of forty-five thousand francs in fitting up for his Florentine the former apartment of the late Coralie. In Paris there are suites of rooms as well as houses and streets that have their predestinations. Enriched with a magnificent service of plate, the “prima danseuse” of the Gaiete began to give dinners, spent three hundred francs a month on her dress, never went out except in a hired carriage, and had a maid for herself, a cook, and a little footman.

In fact, an engagement at the Opera was already in the wind. The Cocon d’Or did homage to its first master by sending its most splendid products for the gratification of Mademoiselle Cabirolle, now called Florentine. The magnificence which suddenly burst upon her apartment in the rue de Vendome would have satisfied the most ambitious supernumerary. After being the master of the ship for seven years, Cardot now found himself towed along by a force of unlimited caprice. But the luckless old gentleman was fond of his tyrant. Florentine was to close his eyes; he meant to leave her a hundred thousand francs. The iron age had now begun.

Georges Marest, with thirty thousand francs a year, and a handsome face, courted Florentine. Every danseuse makes a point of having some young man who will take her to drive, and arrange the gay excursions into the country which all such women delight in. However disinterested she may be, the courtship of such a star is a passion which costs some trifles to the favored mortal. There are dinners at restaurants, boxes at the theatres, carriages to go to the environs and return, choice wines consumed in profusion,--for an opera danseuse eats and drinks like an athlete. Georges amused himself like other young men who pass at a jump from paternal discipline to a rich independence, and the death of his uncle, nearly doubling his means, had still further enlarged his ideas. As long as he had only his patrimony of eighteen thousand francs a year, his intention was to become a notary, but (as his cousin remarked to the clerks of Desroches) a man must be stupid who begins a profession with the fortune most men hope to acquire in order to leave it. Wiser then Georges, Frederic persisted in following the career of public office, and of putting himself, as we have seen, in training for it.

A young man as handsome and attractive as Georges might very well aspire to the hand of a rich creole; and the clerks in Desroches’ office, all of them the sons of poor parents, having never frequented the great world, or, indeed, known anything about it, put themselves into their best clothes on the following day, impatient enough to behold, and be presented to the Mexican Marquise de las Florentinas y Cabirolos.

“What luck,” said Oscar to Godeschal, as they were getting up in the morning, “that I had just ordered a new coat and trousers and waistcoat, and that my dear mother had made me that fine outfit! I have six frilled shirts of fine linen in the dozen she made for me. We shall make an appearance! Ha! ha! suppose one of us were to carry off the Creole marchioness from that Georges Marest!”

“Fine occupation that, for a clerk in our office!” cried Godeschal. “Will you never control your vanity, popinjay?”

“Ah! monsieur,” said Madame Clapart, who entered the room at that moment to bring her son some cravats, and overheard the last words of the head-clerk, “would to God that my Oscar might always follow your advice. It is what I tell him all the time: ‘Imitate Monsieur Godeschal; listen to what he tells you.’”

“He’ll go all right, madame,” interposed Godeschal, “but he mustn’t commit any more blunders like one he was guilty of last night, or he’ll lose the confidence of the master. Monsieur Desroches won’t stand any one not succeeding in what he tells them to do. He ordered your son, for a first employment in his new clerkship, to get a copy of a judgment which ought to have been served last evening, and Oscar, instead of doing so, allowed himself to be fooled. The master was furious. It’s a chance if I have been able to repair the mischief by going this morning, at six o’clock, to see the head-clerk at the Palais, who has promised me to have a copy ready by seven o’clock to-morrow morning.”

“Ah, Godeschal!” cried Oscar, going up to him and pressing his hand. “You are, indeed, a true friend.”

“Ah, monsieur!” said Madame Clapart, “a mother is happy, indeed, in knowing that her son has a friend like you; you may rely upon a gratitude which can end only with my life.”

Poor woman! she now had the supreme delight of seeing her son well-dressed, and she gave him a gold watch, the price of which she had saved by economy, as the reward of his good conduct.

“You draw for the conscription next week,” she said, “and to prepare, in case you get a bad number, I have been to see your uncle Cardot. He is very much pleased with you; and so delighted to know you are a second clerk at twenty, and to hear of your successful examination at the law-school, that he promised me the money for a substitute. Are not you glad to think that your own good conduct has brought such reward? Though you have some privations to bear, remember the happiness of being able, five years from now, to buy a practice. And think, too, my dear little kitten, how happy you make your mother.”

Oscar’s face, somewhat thinned by study, had acquired, through habits of business, a serious expression. He had reached his full growth, his beard was thriving; adolescence had given place to virility. The mother could not refrain from admiring her son and kissing him, as she said:--

“Amuse yourself, my dear boy, but remember the advice of our good Monsieur Godeschal. Ah! by the bye, I was nearly forgetting! Here’s a present our friend Moreau sends you. See! what a pretty pocket-book.”

“And I want it, too; for the master gave me five hundred francs to get that cursed judgment of Vandernesse versus Vandernesse, and I don’t want to leave that sum of money in my room.”

“But, surely, you are not going to carry it with you!” exclaimed his mother, in alarm. “Suppose you should lose a sum like that! Hadn’t you better give it to Monsieur Godeschal for safe keeping?”

“Godeschal!” cried Oscar, who thought his mother’s suggestion excellent.

But Godeschal, who, like all clerks, has his time to himself on Sundays, from ten to two o’clock, had already departed.

When his mother left him, Oscar went to lounge upon the boulevards until it was time to go to Georges Marest’s breakfast. Why not display those beautiful clothes which he wore with a pride and joy which all young fellows who have been pinched for means in their youth will remember. A pretty waistcoat with a blue ground and a palm-leaf pattern, a pair of black cashmere trousers pleated, a black coat very well fitting, and a cane with a gilt top, the cost of which he had saved himself, caused a natural joy to the poor lad, who thought of his manner of dress on the day of that journey to Presles, as the effect that Georges had then produced upon him came back to his mind.

Oscar had before him the perspective of a day of happiness; he was to see the gay world at last! Let us admit that a clerk deprived of enjoyments, though longing for dissipation, was likely to let his unchained senses drive the wise counsels of his mother and Godeschal completely out of his mind. To the shame of youth let it be added that good advice is never lacking to it. In the matter of Georges, Oscar himself had a feeling of aversion for him; he felt humiliated before a witness of that scene in the salon at Presles when Moreau had flung him at the count’s feet. The moral senses have their laws, which are implacable, and we are always punished for disregarding them. There is one in particular, which the animals themselves obey without discussion, and invariably; it is that which tells us to avoid those who have once injured us, with or without intention, voluntarily or involuntarily. The creature from whom we receive either damage or annoyance will always be displeasing to us. Whatever may be his rank or the degree of affection in which he stands to us, it is best to break away from him; for our evil genius has sent him to us. Though the Christian sentiment is opposed to it, distrust remains, and its voice is forever heard. Would Oscar, at twenty years of age, have the wisdom to listen to it?

Alas! when, at half-past two o’clock, Oscar entered the salon of the Rocher de Cancale,--where were three invited persons besides the clerks, to wit: an old captain of dragoons, named Giroudeau; Finot, a journalist who might procure an engagement for Florentine at the Opera, and du Bruel, an author, the friend of Tullia, one of Mariette’s rivals,--the second clerk felt his secret hostility vanish at the first handshaking, the first dashes of conversation as they sat around a table luxuriously served. Georges, moreover, made himself charming to Oscar.

“You’ve taken to private diplomacy,” he said; “for what difference is there between a lawyer and an ambassador? only that between a nation and an individual. Ambassadors are the attorneys of Peoples. If I can ever be useful to you, let me know.”

“Well,” said Oscar, “I’ll admit to you now that you once did me a very great harm.”

“Pooh!” said Georges, after listening to the explanation for which he asked; “it was Monsieur de Serizy who behaved badly. His wife! I wouldn’t have her at any price; neither would I like to be in the count’s red skin, minister of State and peer of France as he is. He has a small mind, and I don’t care a fig for him now.”

Oscar listened with true pleasure to these slurs on the count, for they diminished, in a way, the importance of his fault; and he echoed the spiteful language of the ex-notary, who amused himself by predicting the blows to the nobility of which the bourgeoisie were already dreaming,--blows which were destined to become a reality in 1830.

At half-past three the solid eating of the feast began; the dessert did not appear till eight o’clock,--each course having taken two hours to serve. None but clerks can eat like that! The stomachs of eighteen and twenty are inexplicable to the medical art. The wines were worthy of Borrel, who in those days had superseded the illustrious Balaine, the creator of the first restaurant for delicate and perfectly prepared food in Paris,--that is to say, the whole world.

The report of this Belshazzar’s feast for the architriclino-basochien register was duly drawn up, beginning, “Inter pocula aurea restauranti, qui vulgo dicitur Rupes Cancali.” Every one can imagine the fine page now added to the Golden Book of jurisprudential festivals.

Godeschal disappeared after signing the report, leaving the eleven guests, stimulated by the old captain of the Imperial Guard, to the wines, toasts, and liqueurs of a dessert composed of choice and early fruits, in pyramids that rivalled the obelisk of Thebes. By half-past ten the little sub-clerk was in such a state that Georges packed him into a coach, paid his fare, and gave the address of his mother to the driver. The remaining ten, all as drunk as Pitt and Dundas, talked of going on foot along the boulevards, considering the fine evening, to the house of the Marquise de las Florentinas y Cabirolos, where, about midnight, they might expect to find the most brilliant society of Paris. They felt the need of breathing the pure air into their lungs; but, with the exception of Georges, Giroudeau, du Bruel, and Finot, all four accustomed to Parisian orgies, not one of the party could walk. Consequently, Georges sent to a livery-stable for three open carriages, in which he drove his company for an hour round the exterior boulevards from Monmartre to the Barriere du Trone. They returned by Bercy, the quays, and the boulevards to the rue de Vendome.

The clerks were fluttering still in the skies of fancy to which youth is lifted by intoxication, when their amphitryon introduced them into Florentine’s salon. There sparkled a bevy of stage princesses, who, having been informed, no doubt, of Frederic’s joke, were amusing themselves by imitating the women of good society. They were then engaged in eating ices. The wax-candles flamed in the candelabra. Tullia’s footmen and those of Madame du Val-Noble and Florine, all in full livery, were serving the dainties on silver salvers. The hangings, a marvel of Lyonnaise workmanship, fastened by gold cords, dazzled all eyes. The flowers of the carpet were like a garden. The richest “bibelots” and curiosities danced before the eyes of the new-comers.

At first, and in the state to which Georges had brought them, the clerks, and more particularly Oscar, believed in the Marquise de las Florentinas y Cabirolos. Gold glittered on four card-tables in the bed-chamber. In the salon, the women were playing at vingt-et-un, kept by Nathan, the celebrated author.

After wandering, tipsy and half asleep, through the dark exterior boulevards, the clerks now felt that they had wakened in the palace of Armida. Oscar, presented to the marquise by Georges, was quite stupefied, and did not recognize the danseuse he had seen at the Gaiete, in this lady, aristocratically decolletee and swathed in laces, till she looked like the vignette of a keepsake, who received him with manners and graces the like of which was neither in the memory nor the imagination of a young clerk rigidly brought up. After admiring the splendors of the apartment and the beautiful women there displayed, who had all outdone each other in their dress for this occasion, Oscar was taken by the hand and led by Florentine to a vingt-et-un table.

“Let me present you,” she said, “to the beautiful Marquise d’Anglade, one of my nearest friends.”

And she took Oscar to the pretty Fanny Beaupre, who had just made herself a reputation at the Porte-Saint-Martin, in a melodrama entitled “La Famille d’Anglade.”

“My dear,” said Florentine, “allow me to present to you a charming youth, whom you can take as a partner in the game.”

“Ah! that will be delightful,” replied the actress, smiling, as she looked at Oscar. “I am losing. Shall we go shares, monsieur?”

“Madame la marquise, I am at your orders,” said Oscar, sitting down beside her.

“Put down the money; I’ll play; you shall bring me luck! See, here are my last hundred francs.”

And the “marquise” took out from her purse, the rings of which were adorned with diamonds, five gold pieces. Oscar pulled out his hundred in silver five-franc pieces, much ashamed at having to mingle such ignoble coins with gold. In ten throws the actress lost the two hundred francs.

“Oh! how stupid!” she cried. “I’m banker now. But we’ll play together still, won’t we?”

Fanny Beaupre rose to take her place as banker, and Oscar, finding himself observed by the whole table, dared not retire on the ground that he had no money. Speech failed him, and his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth.

“Lend me five hundred francs,” said the actress to the danseuse.

Florentine brought the money, which she obtained from Georges, who had just passed eight times at ecarte.

“Nathan has won twelve hundred francs,” said the actress to Oscar. “Bankers always win; we won’t let them fool us, will we?” she whispered in his ear.

Persons of nerve, imagination, and dash will understand how it was that poor Oscar opened his pocket-book and took out the note of five hundred francs which Desroches had given him. He looked at Nathan, the distinguished author, who now began, with Florine, to play a heavy game against the bank.

“Come, my little man, take ‘em up,” cried Fanny Beaupre, signing to Oscar to rake in the two hundred francs which Nathan and Florine had punted.

The actress did not spare taunts or jests on those who lost. She enlivened the game with jokes which Oscar thought singular; but reflection was stifled by joy; for the first two throws produced a gain of two thousand francs. Oscar then thought of feigning illness and making his escape, leaving his partner behind him; but “honor” kept him there. Three more turns and the gains were lost. Oscar felt a cold sweat running down his back, and he was sobered completely.

The next two throws carried off the thousand francs of their mutual stake. Oscar was consumed with thirst, and drank three glasses of iced punch one after the other. The actress now led him into the bed-chamber, where the rest of the company were playing, talking frivolities with an easy air. But by this time the sense of his wrong-doing overcame him; the figure of Desroches appeared to him like a vision. He turned aside to a dark corner and sat down, putting his handkerchief to his eyes, and wept. Florentine noticed the attitude of true grief, which, because it is sincere, is certain to strike the eye of one who acts. She ran to him, took the handkerchief from his hand, and saw his tears; then she led him into a boudoir alone.

“What is it, my child?” she said.

At the tone and accent of that voice Oscar recognized a motherly kindness which is often found in women of her kind, and he answered openly:--

“I have lost five hundred francs which my employer gave me to obtain a document to-morrow morning; there’s nothing for me but to fling myself into the river; I am dishonored.”

“How silly you are!” she said. “Stay where you are; I’ll get you a thousand francs and you can win back what you’ve lost; but don’t risk more than five hundred, so that you may be sure of your master’s money. Georges plays a fine game at ecarte; bet on him.”

Oscar, frightened by his position, accepted the offer of the mistress of the house.

“Ah!” he thought, “it is only women of rank who are capable of such kindness. Beautiful, noble, rich! how lucky Georges is!”

He received the thousand francs from Florentine and returned to bet on his hoaxer. Georges had just passed for the fourth time when Oscar sat down beside him. The other players saw with satisfaction the arrival of a new better; for all, with the instinct of gamblers, took the side of Giroudeau, the old officer of the Empire.

“Messieurs,” said Georges, “you’ll be punished for deserting me; I feel in the vein. Come, Oscar, we’ll make an end of them!”

Georges and his partner lost five games running. After losing the thousand francs Oscar was seized with the fury of play and insisted on taking the cards himself. By the result of a chance not at all uncommon with those who play for the first time, he won. But Georges bewildered him with advice; told him when to throw the cards, and even snatched them from his hand; so that this conflict of wills and intuitions injured his vein. By three o’clock in the morning, after various changes of fortune, and still drinking punch, Oscar came down to his last hundred francs. He rose with a heavy head, completely stupefied, took a few steps forward, and fell upon a sofa in the boudoir, his eyes closing in a leaden sleep.

“Mariette,” said Fanny Beaupre to Godeschal’s sister, who had come in about two o’clock, “do you dine here to-morrow? Camusot and Pere Cardot are coming, and we’ll have some fun.”

“What!” cried Florentine, “and my old fellow never told me!”

“He said he’d tell you to-morrow morning,” remarked Fanny Beaupre.

“The devil take him and his orgies!” exclaimed Florentine. “He and Camusot are worse than magistrates or stage-managers. But we have very good dinners here, Mariette,” she continued. “Cardot always orders them from Chevet’s; bring your Duc de Maufrigneuse and we’ll make them dance like Tritons.”

Hearing the names of Cardot and Camusot, Oscar made an effort to throw off his sleep; but he could only mutter a few words which were not understood, and then he fell back upon the silken cushions.

“You’ll have to keep him here all night,” said Fanny Beaupre, laughing, to Florentine.

“Oh! poor boy! he is drunk with punch and despair both. It is the second clerk in your brother’s office,” she said to Mariette. “He has lost the money his master gave him for some legal affair. He wanted to drown himself; so I lent him a thousand francs, but those brigands Finot and Giroudeau won them from him. Poor innocent!”

“But we ought to wake him,” said Mariette. “My brother won’t make light of it, nor his master either.”

“Oh, wake him if you can, and carry him off with you!” said Florentine, returning to the salon to receive the adieux of some departing guests.

Presently those who remained began what was called “character dancing,” and by the time it was broad daylight, Florentine, tired out, went to bed, oblivious to Oscar, who was still in the boudoir sound asleep.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
About eleven the next morning, a terrible sound awoke the unfortunate clerk. Recognizing the voice of his uncle Cardot, he thought it wise to feign sleep, and so turned his face into the yellow velvet cushions on which he had passed the night.

“Really, my little Florentine,” said the old gentleman, “this is neither right nor sensible; you danced last evening in ‘Les Ruines,’ and you have spent the night in an orgy. That’s deliberately going to work to lose your freshness. Besides, it was ungrateful to inaugurate this beautiful apartment without even letting me know. Who knows what has been going on here?”

“Old monster!” cried Florentine, “haven’t you a key that lets you in at all hours? My ball lasted till five in the morning, and you have the cruelty to come and wake me up at eleven!”

“Half-past eleven, Titine,” observed Cardot, humbly. “I came out early to order a dinner fit for an archbishop at Chevet’s. Just see how the carpets are stained! What sort of people did you have here?”

“You needn’t complain, for Fanny Beaupre told me you were coming to dinner with Camusot, and to please you I’ve invited Tullia, du Bruel, Mariette, the Duc de Maufrigneuse, Florine, and Nathan. So you’ll have the four loveliest creatures ever seen behind the foot-lights; we’ll dance you a ‘pas de Zephire.’”

“It is enough to kill you to lead such a life!” cried old Cardot; “and look at the broken glasses! What pillage! The antechamber actually makes me shudder--”

At this moment the wrathful old gentleman stopped short as if magnetized, like a bird which a snake is charming. He saw the outline of a form in a black coat through the door of the boudoir.

“Ah, Mademoiselle Cabirolle!” he said at last.

“Well, what?” she asked.

The eyes of the danseuse followed those of the little old man; and when she recognized the presence of the clerk she went off into such fits of laughter that not only was the old gentleman nonplussed, but Oscar was compelled to appear; for Florentine took him by the arm, still pealing with laughter at the conscience-stricken faces of the uncle and nephew.

“You here, nephew?”

“Nephew! so he’s your nephew?” cried Florentine, with another burst of laughter. “You never told me about him. Why didn’t Mariette carry you off?” she said to Oscar, who stood there petrified. “What can he do now, poor boy?”

“Whatever he pleases!” said Cardot, sharply, marching to the door as if to go away.

“One moment, papa Cardot. You will be so good as to get your nephew out of a scrape into which I led him; for he played the money of his master and lost it, and I lend him a thousand francs to win it back, and he lost that too.”

“Miserable boy! you lost fifteen hundred francs at play at your age?”

“Oh, uncle, uncle!” cried poor Oscar, plunged by these words into all the horrors of his position, and falling on his knees before his uncle, with clasped hands, “It is twelve o’clock! I am lost, dishonored! Monsieur Desroches will have no pity! He gave me the money for an important affair, in which his pride was concerned. I was to get a paper at the Palais in the case of Vandernesse versus Vandernesse! What will become of me? Oh, save me for the sake of my father and aunt! Come with me to Monsieur Desroches, and explain it to him; make some excuse,--anything!”

These sentences were jerked out through sobs and tears that might have moved the sphinx of Luxor.

“Old skinflint!” said the danseuse, who was crying, “will you let your own nephew be dishonored,--the son of the man to whom you owe your fortune?--for his name is Oscar Husson. Save him, or Titine will deny you forever!”

“But how did he come here?” asked Cardot.

“Don’t you see that the reason he forgot to go for those papers was because he was drunk and overslept himself. Georges and his cousin Frederic took all the clerks in his office to a feast at the Rocher de Cancale.”

Pere Cardot looked at Florentine and hesitated.

“Come, come,” she said, “you old monkey, shouldn’t I have hid him better if there had been anything else in it?”

“There, take your five hundred francs, you scamp!” said Cardot to his nephew, “and remember, that’s the last penny you’ll ever get from me. Go and make it up with your master if you can. I’ll return the thousand francs which you borrowed of mademoiselle; but I’ll never hear another word about you.”

Oscar disappeared, not wishing to hear more. Once in the street, however, he knew not where to go.

Chance which destroys men and chance which saves them were both making equal efforts for and against Oscar during that fateful morning. But he was doomed to fall before a master who forgave no failure in any affair he had once undertaken. When Mariette reached home that night, she felt alarmed at what might happen to the youth in whom her brother took interest and she wrote a hasty note to Godeschal, telling him what had happened to Oscar and inclosing a bank bill for five hundred francs to repair his loss. The kind-hearted creature went to sleep after charging her maid to carry the little note to Desroches’ office before seven o’clock in the morning. Godeschal, on his side, getting up at six and finding that Oscar had not returned, guessed what had happened. He took the five hundred francs from his own little hoard and rushed to the Palais, where he obtained a copy of the judgment and returned in time to lay it before Desroches by eight o’clock.

Meantime Desroches, who always rose at four, was in his office by seven. Mariette’s maid, not finding the brother of her mistress in his bedroom, came down to the office and there met Desroches, to whom she very naturally offered the note.

“Is it about business?” he said; “I am Monsieur Desroches.”

“You can see, monsieur,” replied the maid.

Desroches opened the letter and read it. Finding the five-hundred-franc note, he went into his private office furiously angry with his second clerk. About half-past seven he heard Godeschal dictating to the second head-clerk a copy of the document in question, and a few moments later the good fellow entered his master’s office with an air of triumph in his heart.

“Did Oscar Husson fetch the paper this morning from Simon?” inquired Desroches.

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Who gave him the money?”

“Why, you did, Saturday,” replied Godeschal.

“Then it rains five-hundred-franc notes,” cried Desroches. “Look here, Godeschal, you are a fine fellow, but that little Husson does not deserve such generosity. I hate idiots, but I hate still more the men who will go wrong in spite of the fatherly care which watches over them.” He gave Godeschal Mariette’s letter and the five-hundred-franc note which she had sent. “You must excuse my having opened it,” he said, “but your sister’s maid told me it was on business. Dismiss Husson.”

“Poor unhappy boy! what grief he has caused me!” said Godeschal, “that tall ne’er-do-well of a Georges Marest is his evil genius; he ought to flee him like the plague; if not, he’ll bring him to some third disgrace.”

“What do you mean by that?” asked Desroches.

Godeschal then related briefly the affair of the journey to Presles.

“Ah! yes,” said the lawyer, “I remember Joseph Bridau told me that story about the time it happened. It is to that meeting that we owe the favor Monsieur de Serizy has since shown in the matter of Joseph’s brother, Philippe Bridau.”

At this moment Moreau, to whom the case of the Vandernesse estate was of much importance, entered the office. The marquis wished to sell the land in parcels and the count was opposed to such a sale. The land-agent received therefore the first fire of Desroches’ wrath against his ex-second clerk and all the threatening prophecies which he fulminated against him. The result was that this most sincere friend and protector of the unhappy youth came to the conclusion that his vanity was incorrigible.

“Make him a barrister,” said Desroches. “He has only his last examination to pass. In that line, his defects might prove virtues, for self-love and vanity give tongues to half the attorneys.”

At this time Clapart, who was ill, was being nursed by his wife,--a painful task, a duty without reward. The sick man tormented the poor creature, who was now doomed to learn what venomous and spiteful teasing a half-imbecile man, whom poverty had rendered craftily savage, could be capable of in the weary tete-a-tete of each endless day. Delighted to turn a sharpened arrow in the sensitive heart of the mother, he had, in a measure, studied the fears that Oscar’s behavior and defects inspired in the poor woman. When a mother receives from her child a shock like that of the affair at Presles, she continues in a state of constant fear, and, by the manner in which his wife boasted of Oscar every time he obtained the slightest success, Clapart knew the extent of her secret uneasiness, and he took pains to rouse it on every occasion.

“Well, Madame,” Clapart would say, “Oscar is doing better than I even hoped. That journey to Presles was only a heedlessness of youth. Where can you find young lads who do not commit just such faults? Poor child! he bears his privations heroically! If his father had lived, he would never have had any. God grant he may know how to control his passions!”
 etc., etc.

While all these catastrophes were happening in the rue de Vendome and the rue de Bethisy, Clapart, sitting in the chimney corner, wrapped in an old dressing-gown, watched his wife, who was engaged over the fire in their bedroom in simultaneously making the family broth, Clapart’s “tisane,” and her own breakfast.

“Mon Dieu! I wish I knew how the affair of yesterday ended. Oscar was to breakfast at the Rocher de Cancale and spend the evening with a marquise--”

“Don’t trouble yourself! Sooner or later you’ll find out about your swan,” said her husband. “Do you really believe in that marquise? Pooh! A young man who has senses and a taste for extravagance like Oscar can find such ladies as that on every bush--if he pays for them. Some fine morning you’ll find yourself with a load of debt on your back.”

“You are always trying to put me in despair!” cried Madame Clapart. “You complained that my son lived on your salary, and never has he cost you a penny. For two years you haven’t had the slightest cause of complaint against him; here he is second clerk, his uncle and Monsieur Moreau pay all expenses, and he earns, himself, a salary of eight hundred francs. If we have bread to eat in our old age we may owe it all to that dear boy. You are really too unjust--”

“You call my foresight unjust, do you?” replied the invalid, crossly.

Just then the bell rang loudly. Madame Clapart ran to open the door, and remained in the outer room with Moreau, who had come to soften the blow which Oscar’s new folly would deal to the heart of his poor mother.

“What! he gambled with the money of the office?” she cried, bursting into tears.

“Didn’t I tell you so, hey?” said Clapart, appearing like a spectre at the door of the salon whither his curiosity had brought him.

“Oh! what shall we do with him?” said Madame Clapart, whose grief made her impervious to Clapart’s taunt.

“If he bore my name,” replied Moreau, “I should wait composedly till he draws for the conscription, and if he gets a fatal number I should not provide him with a substitute. This is the second time your son has committed a folly out of sheer vanity. Well, vanity may inspire fine deeds in war and may advance him in the career of a soldier. Besides, six years of military service will put some lead into his head; and as he has only his last legal examination to pass, it won’t be much ill-luck for him if he doesn’t become a lawyer till he is twenty-six; that is, if he wants to continue in the law after paying, as they say, his tax of blood. By that time, at any rate, he will have been severely punished, he will have learned experience, and contracted habits of subordination. Before making his probation at the bar he will have gone through his probations in life.”

“If that is your decision for a son,” said Madame Clapart, “I see that the heart of a father is not like that of a mother. My poor Oscar a common soldier!--”

“Would you rather he flung himself headforemost into the Seine after committing a dishonorable action? He cannot now become a solicitor; do you think him steady and wise enough to be a barrister? No. While his reason is maturing, what will he become? A dissipated fellow. The discipline of the army will, at least, preserve him from that.”

“Could he not go into some other office? His uncle Cardot has promised to pay for his substitute; Oscar is to dedicate his graduating thesis to him.”

At this moment carriage-wheels were heard, and a hackney-coach containing Oscar and all his worldly belongings stopped before the door. The luckless young man came up at once.

“Ah! here you are, Monsieur Joli-Coeur!” cried Clapart.

Oscar kissed his mother, and held out to Moreau a hand which the latter refused to take. To this rebuff Oscar replied by a reproachful look, the boldness of which he had never shown before. Then he turned on Clapart.

“Listen to me, monsieur,” said the youth, transformed into a man. “You worry my poor mother devilishly, and that’s your right, for she is, unfortunately, your wife. But as for me, it is another thing. I shall be of age in a few months; and you have no rights over me even as a minor. I have never asked anything of you. Thanks to Monsieur Moreau, I have never cost you one penny, and I owe you no gratitude. Therefore, I say, let me alone!”

Clapart, hearing this apostrophe, slunk back to his sofa in the chimney corner. The reasoning and the inward fury of the young man, who had just received a lecture from his friend Godeschal, silenced the imbecile mind of the sick man.

“A momentary temptation, such as you yourself would have yielded to at my age,” said Oscar to Moreau, “has made me commit a fault which Desroches thinks serious, though it is only a peccadillo. I am more provoked with myself for taking Florentine of the Gaiete for a marquise than I am for losing fifteen hundred francs after a little debauch in which everybody, even Godeschal, was half-seas over. This time, at any rate, I’ve hurt no one by myself. I’m cured of such things forever. If you are willing to help me, Monsieur Moreau, I swear to you that the six years I must still stay a clerk before I can get a practice shall be spent without--”

“Stop there!” said Moreau. “I have three children, and I can make no promises.”

“Never mind, never mind,” said Madame Clapart to her son, casting a reproachful glance at Moreau. “Your uncle Cardot--”

“I have no longer an uncle Cardot,” replied Oscar, who related the scene at the rue de Vendome.

Madame Clapart, feeling her legs give way under the weight of her body, staggered to a chair in the dining-room, where she fell as if struck by lightning.

“All the miseries together!” she said, as she fainted.

Moreau took the poor mother in his arms, and carried her to the bed in her chamber. Oscar remained motionless, as if crushed.

“There is nothing left for you,” said Moreau, coming back to him, “but to make yourself a soldier. That idiot of a Clapart looks to me as though he couldn’t live three months, and then your mother will be without a penny. Ought I not, therefore, to reserve for her the little money I am able to give? It was impossible to tell you this before her. As a soldier, you’ll eat plain bread and reflect on life such as it is to those who are born into it without fortune.”

“I may get a lucky number,” said Oscar.

“Suppose you do, what then? Your mother has well fulfilled her duty towards you. She gave you an education; she placed you on the right road, and secured you a career. You have left it. Now, what can you do? Without money, nothing; as you know by this time. You are not a man who can begin a new career by taking off your coat and going to work in your shirt-sleeves with the tools of an artisan. Besides, your mother loves you, and she would die to see you come to that.”

Oscar sat down and no longer restrained his tears, which flowed copiously. At last he understood this language, so completely unintelligible to him ever since his first fault.

“Men without means ought to be perfect,” added Moreau, not suspecting the profundity of that cruel sentence.

“My fate will soon be decided,” said Oscar. “I draw my number the day after to-morrow. Between now and then I will decide upon my future.”

Moreau, deeply distressed in spite of his stern bearing, left the household in the rue de la Cerisaie to its despair.

Three days later Oscar drew the number twenty-seven. In the interests of the poor lad the former steward of Presles had the courage to go to the Comte de Serizy and ask for his influence to get Oscar into the cavalry. It happened that the count’s son, having left the Ecole Polytechnique rather low in his class, was appointed, as a favor, sub-lieutenant in a regiment of cavalry commanded by the Duc de Maufrigneuse. Oscar had, therefore, in his great misfortune, the small luck of being, at the Comte de Serizy’s instigation, drafted into that noble regiment, with the promise of promotion to quartermaster within a year. Chance had thus placed the ex-clerk under the command of the son of the Comte de Serizy.

Madame Clapart, after languishing for some days, so keenly was she affected by these catastrophes, became a victim to the remorse which seizes upon many a mother whose conduct has been frail in her youth, and who, in her old age, turns to repentance. She now considered herself under a curse. She attributed the sorrows of her second marriage and the misfortunes of her son to a just retribution by which God was compelling her to expiate the errors and pleasures of her youth. This opinion soon became a certainty in her mind. The poor woman went, for the first time in forty years, to confess herself to the Abbe Gaudron, vicar of Saint-Paul’s, who led her into the practice of devotion. But so ill-used and loving a soul as that of Madame Clapart’s could never be anything but simply pious. The Aspasia of the Directory wanted to expiate her sins in order to draw down the blessing of God on the head of her poor Oscar, and she henceforth vowed herself to works and deeds of the purest piety. She believed she had won the attention of heaven when she saved the life of Monsieur Clapart, who, thanks to her devotion, lived on to torture her; but she chose to see, in the tyranny of that imbecile mind, a trial inflicted by the hand of one who loveth while he chasteneth.

Oscar, meantime, behaved so well that in 1830 he was first sergeant of the company of the Vicomte de Serizy, which gave him the rank of sub-lieutenant of the line. Oscar Husson was by that time twenty-five years old. As the Royal Guard, to which his regiment was attached, was always in garrison in Paris, or within a circumference of thirty miles around the capital, he came to see his mother from time to time, and tell her his griefs; for he had the sense to see that he could never become an officer as matters then were. At that time the cavalry grades were all being taken up by the younger sons of noble families, and men without the article to their names found promotion difficult. Oscar’s sole ambition was to leave the Guards and be appointed sub-lieutenant in a regiment of the cavalry of the line. In the month of February, 1830, Madame Clapart obtained this promotion for her son through the influence of Madame la Dauphine, granted to the Abbe Gaudron, now rector of Saint-Pauls.

Although Oscar outwardly professed to be devoted to the Bourbons, in the depths of his heart he was a liberal. Therefore, in the struggle of 1830, he went over to the side of the people. This desertion, which had an importance due to the crisis in which it took place, brought him before the eyes of the public. During the excitement of triumph in the month of August he was promoted lieutenant, received the cross of the Legion of honor, and was attached as aide-de-camp to La Fayette, who gave him the rank of captain in 1832. When the amateur of the best of all possible republics was removed from the command of the National guard, Oscar Husson, whose devotion to the new dynasty amounted to fanaticism, was appointed major of a regiment sent to Africa at the time of the first expedition undertaken by the Prince-royal. The Vicomte de Serizy chanced to be the lieutenant-colonel of this regiment. At the affair of the Makta, where the field had to be abandoned to the Arabs, Monsieur de Serizy was left wounded under a dead horse. Oscar, discovering this, called out to the squadron:

“Messieurs, it is going to death, but we cannot abandon our colonel.”

He dashed upon the enemy, and his electrified soldiers followed him. The Arabs, in their first astonishment at this furious and unlooked-for return, allowed Oscar to seize the viscount, whom he flung across his horse, and carried off at full gallop,--receiving, as he did so, two slashes from yataghans on his left arm.

Oscar’s conduct on this occasion was rewarded with the officer’s cross of the Legion of honor, and by his promotion to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He took the most affectionate care of the Vicomte de Serizy, whose mother came to meet him on the arrival of the regiment at Toulon, where, as we know, the young man died of his wounds.

The Comtesse de Serizy had not separated her son from the man who had shown him such devotion. Oscar himself was so seriously wounded that the surgeons whom the countess had brought with her from Paris thought best to amputate his left arm.

Thus the Comte de Serizy was led not only to forgive Oscar for his painful remarks on the journey to Presles, but to feel himself his debtor on behalf of his son, now buried in the chapel of the chateau de Serizy.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Years after the affair at Makta, an old lady in black, leaning on the arm of a man of about thirty-four—whom observers would know as a retired officer by his lost arm and the Legion of Honor rosette in his buttonhole—stood at eight one May morning under the porte-cochere of the Lion d’Argent, rue de Faubourg Saint-Denis, apparently waiting for a diligence. Pierrotin, master of the line of coaches through the valley of the Oise (sending one by Saint-Leu-Taverny and Isle-Adam to Beaumont), would scarcely have recognized in this bronzed, maimed officer the little Oscar Husson he had taken to Presles. Madame Husson, finally a widow, was hardly recognizable either. Clapart, a victim of Fieschi’s machine, had by death done his wife more service than in life; the idle lounger whose presence had caused the explosion was gone. The poor widow had been placed on a pension of fifteen hundred francs a year.

The coach, with four iron-gray horses worthy of the Messageries-royales, was divided into coupe, interieur, and rotonde, with an imperiale above. Resembling the “Gondoles” now plying between Paris and Versailles, it was solid and light, well-painted and kept, lined with fine blue cloth, blinds of a Moorish pattern and red morocco cushions; the “Swallow of the Oise” could carry nineteen passengers. Pierrotin, about fifty-six, little changed, still in a blue blouse over a black suit, smoked his pipe and supervised two liveried porters stowing luggage on the imperiale.

“Are your places taken?” he asked Madame Clapart and Oscar, eyeing them like a man trying to recall a likeness.

“Yes—two places in the interieur in the name of my servant, Bellejambe,” said Oscar; “he must have taken them last evening.”

“Ah! monsieur is the new collector of Beaumont,” said Pierrotin. “You take the place of Monsieur Margueron’s nephew?”

“Yes,” Oscar replied, pressing his mother’s arm as she was about to speak. The officer wished to remain unknown for a time.

Suddenly Oscar thrilled at the well-remembered voice of Georges Marest calling from the street: “Pierrotin, have you one seat left?”

“It seems to me you could say ‘monsieur’ without cracking your throat,” Pierrotin snapped.

By his voice alone Oscar would not have recognized the man whose jest had been so fatal to him. Georges, almost bald, kept only tufts of hair frizzed above his ears to hide his bare skull. A misplaced fleshiness—pear-shaped stomach—marred the once-elegant proportions of the ex-young man. Now almost ignoble in look and bearing, Georges bore traces of disasters in love and debauchery: blotched skin and bloated, vinous features; eyes that had lost youthful brilliancy. Careless of clothes, he wore shabby trousers with boot straps and thick-soled, ill-blacked leather boots. A faded waistcoat and a pretentiously tied cravat of worn foulard betrayed the fall from elegance. He appeared in an evening coat instead of a surtout—an obvious sign of poverty: seams whitening, greasy collar, frayed sleeve-edges. Still, he ostentatiously wore yellow kid gloves, dirtied outside, ringed with a signet; a gold-ringed cravat held a silk chain likely for a watch. His battered cane, blue trousers, cheap waistcoat, sky-blue cravat and pink-striped cotton shirt displayed a latent desire to show off that was both spectacle and lesson.

“And that is Georges!” thought Oscar—“the man I left with thirty thousand francs a year!”

“Has Monsieur de Pierrotin a place in the coupe?” Georges asked, ironically answering Pierrotin’s rebuff.

“No; my coupe is taken by a peer of France, Monsieur le Baron de Canalis, his wife, and his mother-in-law. I have nothing left but one place in the interieur.”

“The devil! so peers of France still travel in your coach, do they?” said Georges, recalling his adventure with the Comte de Serizy. “Well, I’ll take that place in the interieur.”

He glanced at Oscar and his mother but did not recognize them. Oscar’s skin was bronzed by Africa; his moustache thick, whiskers ample; hollows in his cheeks and strongly marked features suited his military bearing. The Legion rosette, missing arm, and strict propriety of dress would have diverted Georges’ recollection of his former victim if he had any. Madame Clapart, scarcely seen by Georges, had been transformed by ten years of severe piety; no one would guess the Aspasia of 1797 hid beneath that gray sister.

An enormous old man, simply dressed though in good clothes—Pere Leger—came slowly and heavily along. He nodded familiarly to Pierrotin, who paid him the respect due millionaires.

“Ha! ha! here’s Pere Leger! more and more preponderant!” cried Georges.

“To whom have I the honor of speaking?” asked Leger curtly.

“What! you don’t recognize Colonel Georges, the friend of Ali Pacha? We traveled together once, with the Comte de Serizy.”

One of the follies of those fallen in the world is to want recognition.

“You are much changed,” said the ex-farmer, now twice a millionaire.

“All things change,” Georges shrugged. “Look at the Lion d’Argent and Pierrotin’s coach; they are not like fourteen years ago.”

“Pierrotin now controls the whole Valley of the Oise service,” Leger replied, “and sends out five coaches. He is the bourgeois of Beaumont; he keeps a hotel where all the diligences stop, and has a wife and daughter who are not a bad help to him.”

An old man of seventy came from the hotel and joined the group.

“Come along, Papa Reybert,” said Leger, “we are only waiting now for your great man.”

“Here he comes,” said the steward of Presles, pointing to Joseph Bridau.

Neither Georges nor Oscar recognized the illustrious artist, whose face had the worn lines of fame and whose bearing showed success. The Legion ribbon adorned his black coat; his elegant dress seemed fit for a rural fête.

A clerk with a paper came from the office, now in the former kitchen of the Lion d’Argent, and stood before the empty coupe.

“Monsieur and Madame de Canalis, three places,” he said. At the interieur door: “Monsieur Bellejambe, two places; Monsieur de Reybert, three places; Monsieur—your name, if you please?” he said to Georges.

“Georges Marest,” said the fallen man, low.

The clerk moved to the rotunde, where nurses, country folk and small shopkeepers gathered; after bundling in six passengers, he called four young men to the imperial; then cried: “Start!” Pierrotin mounted beside his driver, who called to the horses: “Pull!” The vehicle, drawn by four horses brought at Roye, climbed the faubourg Saint-Denis at a slow trot.

Past Saint-Laurent it raced like a mail-cart to Saint-Denis, reached in forty minutes. No stop was made at the cheese-cake inn; the coach took the road through the valley of Montmorency.

At the turn into this road Georges broke the silence the travelers had kept while observing each other.

“We go a little faster than fifteen years ago, hey, Pere Leger?” he said, pulling out a silver watch.

“Persons are usually good enough to call me Monsieur Leger,” the millionaire corrected.

“Why, here’s our blagueur of the famous journey to Presles,” cried Joseph Bridau. “Have you made any new campaigns in Asia, Africa, or America?”

“Sacrebleu! I’ve made the revolution of July, and that’s enough for me—it ruined me.”

“Ah! you made the revolution of July!” cried the painter, laughing. “Well, I always said it never made itself.”

“How people meet again!” Leger said to Monsieur de Reybert. “This, papa Reybert, is the clerk of the notary to whom you doubtless owe the stewardship of Presles.”

“We lack Mistigris, now famous under his own name of Leon de Lora,” said Joseph Bridau. “And the little young man who was stupid enough to talk to the count about those skin diseases which are now cured, and about his wife, whom he has recently left so he may die in peace.”

“And the count himself, you lack him,” said old Reybert.

“I’m afraid,” said Joseph Bridau sadly, “that the last journey the count will ever take will be from Presles to Isle-Adam, to be present at my marriage.”

“He still drives about the park,” said Reybert.

“Does his wife come to see him?” asked Leger.

“Once a month,” Reybert replied. “She is never happy out of Paris. Last September she married her niece, Mademoiselle du Rouvre, whom, since their son’s death, she has befriended, to a very rich young Pole, the Comte Laginski.”

“To whom,” asked Madame Clapart, “will Monsieur de Serizy’s property go?”

“To his wife, who will bury him,” replied Georges. “The countess is still fine-looking for fifty-four. She is very elegant and gives one the illusion—”

“She will always be an illusion to you,” said Leger, evidently avenging his old hoaxer.

“I respect her,” Georges said. “But what became of that steward the count turned off?”

“Moreau?” Leger replied. “He’s the deputy from the Oise.”

“Ha! the famous Centre man; Moreau de l’Oise?” cried Georges.

“Yes,” Leger returned, “Moreau de l’Oise. He did more than you for the revolution of July, and has since bought the beautiful estate of Pointel, between Presles and Beaumont.”

“Next to the count’s,” said Georges. “I call that bad taste.”

“Don’t speak so loud,” said Monsieur de Reybert, “for Madame Moreau and her daughter, the Baronne de Canalis, and the Baron himself, the former minister, are in the coupe.”

“What ‘dot’ could he have given his daughter to induce our great orator to marry her?” Georges asked.

“Something like two millions,” old Leger said.

“He always had a taste for millions,” remarked Georges. “He began his pile surreptitiously at Presles—”

“Say nothing against Monsieur Moreau,” Oscar cried hastily. “You ought to have learned by now to hold your tongue in public conveyances.”

Joseph Bridau looked at the one-armed officer for several seconds, then smiled.

“Monsieur is not an ambassador, but his rosette tells us he has made his way nobly; my brother and General Giroudeau have repeatedly named him in their reports.”

“Oscar Husson!” cried Georges. “Faith! if it hadn’t been for your voice I should never have known you.”

“Ah! it was monsieur who so bravely rescued the Vicomte Jules de Serizy from the Arabs?” asked Reybert, “and for whom the count has obtained the collectorship of Beaumont while awaiting that of Pontoise?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Oscar.

“I hope you will give me the pleasure, monsieur,” the great painter said, “of being present at my marriage at Isle-Adam.”

“Whom do you marry?” asked Oscar after accepting.

“Mademoiselle Leger,” Joseph Bridau replied, “the granddaughter of Monsieur de Reybert. Monsieur le comte arranged the marriage for me. As an artist I owe him a great deal, and he wished, before his death, to secure my future, about which I did not think myself.”

“Whom did Pere Leger marry?” asked Georges.

“My daughter,” replied Monsieur de Reybert, “and without a ‘dot.’”

“Ah!” Georges said, assuming a more respectful manner toward Leger. “I am fortunate in having chosen this particular day to do the valley of the Oise. You can all be useful to me, gentlemen.”

“How so?” asked Monsieur Leger.

“In this way,” Georges replied. “I am employed by the ‘Esperance,’ a company just formed, its statutes approved by royal ordinance. This institution gives dowries to girls after ten years, annuities to old men; it pays children’s education and takes charge, in short, of everybody’s fortunes.”

“I can well believe it,” said Pere Leger with a smile. “In a word, you are a runner for an insurance company.”

“No, monsieur. I am the inspector-general; charged with establishing correspondents and appointing agents of the company throughout France. I operate only until agents are selected; it is as delicate as it is difficult to find honest agents.”

“But how did you lose your thirty thousand a year?” asked Oscar.

“As you lost your arm,” replied Georges curtly.

“Then you must have shared in some brilliant action,” Oscar remarked, with sarcasm and bitterness.

“Parbleu! I’ve too many—shares! that’s just what I wanted to sell.”

They arrived at Saint-Leu-Taverny, where all passengers disembarked while the coach changed horses. Oscar admired Pierrotin’s liveliness in unhooking the traces while the driver cleared the reins.

“Poor Pierrotin,” he thought; “he has stuck like me,—not far advanced in the world. Georges has fallen low. All the others, by speculation and talent, have made fortunes. Do we breakfast here, Pierrotin?” he said aloud, slapping him on the shoulder.

“I am not the driver,” Pierrotin answered.

“What are you, then?” asked Colonel Husson.

“The proprietor,” replied Pierrotin.

“Come, don’t be vexed with an old acquaintance,” Oscar said, motioning to his mother, but still retaining a patronizing air. “Don’t you recognize Madame Clapart?”

It was noble of Oscar to present his mother to Pierrotin, for at that moment Madame Moreau de l’Oise, alighting from the coupe, overheard the name and stared disdainfully at Oscar and his mother.

“My faith! madame,” Pierrotin said, “I should never have known you; nor you, either, monsieur; the sun burns black in Africa, doesn’t it?”

This pity Oscar felt for Pierrotin was the last blunder vanity led him to commit, and like his other faults it was punished, but gently: two months after his official installation at Beaumont-sur-Oise, Oscar was paying addresses to Mademoiselle Georgette Pierrotin, whose ‘dot’ was one hundred and fifty thousand francs, and he married the pretty daughter of the proprietor of the stage-coaches of the Oise toward the close of winter, 1838.

The adventure of the journey to Presles taught Oscar Husson discretion; his disaster at Florentine’s card-party strengthened his honesty; the hardships of his military career taught him to understand social hierarchy and yield obedience to his lot. Becoming wise and capable, he was happy. The Comte de Serizy, before his death, obtained the collectorship at Pontoise for him. The influence of Monsieur Moreau de l’Oise and of the Comtesse de Serizy and the Baron de Canalis later secured him a receiver-generalship, and the Camusot family now recognize a relation in him.

Oscar is a commonplace man—gentle, without assumption, modest, always keeping, like his government, to a middle course. He excites neither envy nor contempt. In short, he is the modern bourgeois.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Beaupre, Fanny
       Modest Mignon
       The Muse of the Department
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Bridau, Joseph
       The Purse
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Modeste Mignon
       Another Study of Woman
       Pierre Grassou
       Letters of Two Brides
       Cousin Betty
       The Member for Arcis

     Bruel, Jean Francois du
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       The Government Clerks
       A Prince of Bohemia
       The Middle Classes
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Daughter of Eve

     Cabirolle, Madame
       A Bachelor’s Establishment

     Cabirolle, Agathe-Florentine
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment

     Canalis, Constant-Cyr-Melchior, Baron de
       Letters of Two Brides
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Modeste Mignon
       The Magic Skin
       Another Study of Woman
       Beatrix
       The Unconscious Humorists
       The Member for Arcis

     Cardot, Jean-Jerome-Severin
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket
       Cesar Birotteau

     Coralie, Mademoiselle
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment

     Crottat, Alexandre
       Cesar Birotteau
       Colonel Chabert
       A Woman of Thirty
       Cousin Pons

     Derville
       Gobseck
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Father Goriot
       Colonel Chabert
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Desroches (son)
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Colonel Chabert
       A Woman of Thirty
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Government Clerks
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Man of Business
       The Middle Classes

     Finot, Andoche
       Cesar Birotteau
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Government Clerks
       Gaudissart the Great
       The Firm of Nucingen

     Gaudron, Abbe
       The Government Clerks
       Honorine

     Giroudeau
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment

     Godeschal, Francois-Claude-Marie
       Colonel Chabert
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Pons

     Godeschal, Marie
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Cousin Pons

     Gondreville, Malin, Comte de
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Domestic Peace
       The Member for Arcis

     Grevin
       The Gondreville Mystery
       The Member for Arcis

     Grindot
       Cesar Birotteau
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Beatrix
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Betty

     Lora, Leon de
       The Unconscious Humorists
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Pierre Grassou
       Honorine
       Cousin Betty
       Beatrix

     Loraux, Abbe
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Cesar Birotteau
       Honorine

     Lupin, Amaury
       The Peasantry

     Marest, Frederic
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Member for Arcis

     Marest, Georges
       The Peasantry

     Maufrigneuse, Duc de
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Poiret, the elder
       The Government Clerks
       Father Goriot
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Middle Classes

     Rouvre, Marquis du
       The Imaginary Mistress
       Ursule Mirouet

     Schinner, Hippolyte
       The Purse
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Pierre Grassou
       Albert Savarus
       The Government Clerks
       Modeste Mignon
       The Imaginary Mistress
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Serizy, Comte Hugret de
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Honorine
       Modeste Mignon
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Serizy, Comtesse de
       The Thirteen
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Woman of Thirty
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Another Study of Woman
       The Imaginary Mistress

     Serizy, Vicomte de
       Modeste Mignon
       The Imaginary Mistress

     Vandenesse, Marquis Charles de
       A Woman of Thirty
       A Daughter of Eve

     Vandenesse, Comte Felix de
       The Lily of the Valley
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Cesar Birotteau
       Letters of Two Brides
       The Marriage Settlement
       The Secrets of a Princess
       Another Study of Woman
       The Gondreville Mystery
       A Daughter of Eve
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################