Produced by John Bickers and Dagny

LETTERS OF TWO BRIDES

By Honore de Balzac

Translated by R. S. Scott

DEDICATION

To George Sand

Your name, dear George, while casting a radiance on my book, can gain
no new glory from this page. Yet it is neither self-interest nor
diffidence that leads me to place it here, but the wish that it should
bear witness to the solid friendship between us, which has survived
wanderings and separations, and triumphed over the busy malice of the
world. This feeling is hardly likely to change. The goodly company of
friendly names which will remain attached to my works forms an element
of pleasure amid the vexation caused by their increasing number. Each
fresh book, in fact, gives rise to fresh annoyance—were it only the
reproaches aimed at my too prolific pen, as though it could rival in
fertility the world from which I draw my models! Would it not be a fine
thing, George, if the future antiquarian of dead literatures were to find
in this company none but great names and generous hearts, friends bound
by pure and holy ties, the illustrious figures of the century? May I not
justly pride myself on this possession, rather than on a popularity
necessarily unstable? For him who knows you well, it is happiness to
be able to sign himself, as I do here,

Your friend,
DE BALZAC.

PARIS, June 1840.

LETTERS OF TWO BRIDES

FIRST PART

I. LOUISE DE CHAULIEU TO RENEE DE MAUCOMBE. PARIS, September.

Sweetheart, I too am free! And I am the first too, unless you have
written to Blois at our sweet tryst of letter-writing.

Raise those great black eyes of yours, fixed on my opening sentence,
and keep this excitement for the letter which shall tell you of my first
love. By the way, why always "first?" Is there, I wonder, a second
love?

Don't run on like this, you'll say, but tell me rather how you made
your escape from the convent where you were to take your vows. Well,
dear, I don't know about the Carmelites, but the miracle of my own
deliverance was, I assure you, humdrum. The cries of an alarmed
conscience triumphed over the dictates of a stern policy—that's the
whole mystery. The sombre melancholy that seized me after you left
hastened the happy climax; my aunt did not want to see me die of a
decline, and my mother, whose one unfailing cure for my malady was a
novitiate, gave way before her.

So I am in Paris, thanks to you, my love! Dear Renée, could you have
seen me the day I found myself parted from you, well might you have
gloried in the deep impression you had made on so youthful a bosom. We
had lived so constantly together, sharing dreams and letting fancy roam,
that I believe our souls had become welded together, like those two
Hungarian girls whose death we heard about from M. Beauvisage—poor
misnamed being! Never surely was man better cut out by nature for the
post of convent physician!

Tell me, did you not droop and sicken with your darling?

In my gloomy depression I could do nothing but count over the ties
which bind us. But distance seemed to loosen them; I wearied of life,
like a turtle-dove widowed of her mate. Death smiled sweetly on me, and
I was proceeding quietly to die. To be at Blois, at the Carmelites,
consumed by dread of having to take my vows there, a Mlle. de La
Vallière, but without her prelude, and without my Renée! How could I
not be sick unto death?

How different it used to be! That monotonous existence, where every hour
brings its duty, prayer, task, with such desperate regularity you can tell
what a Carmelite sister is doing at any hour; that dull routine which crushes
all interest, had become for us a world of life and movement. Imagination
opened her realms, and in these our spirits ranged at will, each serving as
magic steed to the other; the world from which our bodies were shut out
became the playground of our fancy. The Lives of the Saints helped us
to understand what was left unsaid! But when I was reft of your company,
I became a true Carmelite, a modern Danaid, drawing daily from Heaven
knows what deep an empty pitcher.

My aunt knew nothing of this inner life. How could she, who has made a
paradise for herself within the two acres of her convent, understand my
revolt? A religious life embraced by girls of our age demands either an
extreme simplicity of soul, which we do not possess, or an ardour for
self-sacrifice like my aunt's. But she sacrificed herself for a brother;
to sacrifice for an unknown person or an idea is more than most mortals
can be asked.

For a fortnight I had been gulping down reckless words, burying reflections,
and accumulating things to tell you, fit for your ear alone; letter-writing
was my only resource. How hungry one's heart gets! I am beginning my
journal this morning, and I picture that yours is started, and that, in a
few days, I shall be at home in your beautiful Gemenos valley, which I
know only through your descriptions, just as you will live that Paris life
hitherto only revealed in our dreams.

Well then, sweet child, know that on a certain morning—a red-letter day
in my life—there arrived from Paris a lady companion and Philippe, the
last remaining of my grandmother's valets, charged to carry me off.
When my aunt summoned me to her room and told me the news, I could not
speak for joy and only gazed at her stupidly.

"My child," she said, in her guttural voice, "I can see you leave me
without regret, but this farewell is not the last; we shall meet again.
God has placed on your forehead the sign of the elect. You have the pride
which leads to heaven or to hell, but your nature is too noble to choose
the downward path. I know you better than you know yourself; with you,
passion will be very different from what it is with most women."

She drew me gently to her and kissed my forehead. The kiss made my flesh
creep, for it burned with the consuming fire which eats away her life,
which has blackened the azure of her eyes, softened the lines, furrowed
the ivory of her temples, and cast a sallow tinge over her face.

Before replying, I kissed her hands.

"Dear aunt," I said, "I shall never forget your kindness; if it has not
made your nunnery all it ought to be for my health, you may be sure
nothing short of a broken heart will bring me back—and that you would
not wish for me. You will not see me here again till my royal lover has
deserted me, and I warn you that if I catch him, death alone shall tear
him from me. I fear no Montespan."

She smiled and said:

"Go, madcap, and take your idle fancies with you. There is certainly
more of the bold Montespan in you than of the gentle La Vallière."

I threw my arms round her. The poor lady could not refrain from escorting
me to the carriage. There her tender gaze was divided between me and the
armorial bearings.

At Beaugency night overtook me, still sunk in stupor from those strange
parting words. What can be awaiting me in this world for which I have so
hungered?

To begin with, I found no one to receive me; my heart had been schooled
in vain. My mother was at the Bois de Boulogne, my father at the Council;
my brother, the Duc de Rhetore, never comes in, I am told, till it is time
to dress for dinner. Miss Griffith (she is not unlike a griffin) and
Philippe took me to my rooms.

The suite is the one which belonged to my beloved grandmother, the
Princess de Vauremont, to whom I owe some sort of fortune which no one
has ever told me about. As you read this, you will understand the
sadness that came over me as I entered a place sacred to many memories,
and found the rooms just as she had left them! I was to sleep in the bed
where she died.

Sitting down on the edge of the sofa, I burst into tears, forgetting I
was not alone, remembering how often I had stood there by her knees to
hear her words. There I had gazed upon her face, buried in brown laces,
worn by age and the pangs of approaching death. The room seemed still
warm with the heat which she kept up there. How comes it that Armande-Louise-Marie
de Chaulieu must be like some peasant girl who sleeps in her mother's bed
the very morrow of her death? To me it was as though the Princess, who
died in 1817, had passed away but yesterday.

I saw many things in the room which ought to have been removed. Their
presence showed the carelessness with which people, busy with state,
may treat their own, and the little thought given since her death to this
grand old lady, who will remain one of the striking figures of the
eighteenth century. Philippe seemed to divine something of the cause of
my tears. He told me the furniture had been left to me in her will and
that my father had allowed the larger suites to remain dismantled, as
the Revolution had left them. On hearing this I rose, and Philippe opened
the door of the small drawing-room leading into the reception-rooms.

In these I found all the well-remembered wreckage: panels above doors,
bare of the pictures they once contained; broken marbles, mirrors carried
off. In old days I was afraid to use the state staircase and cross these
vast deserted rooms; so I reached the Princess' rooms by a small staircase
running under the arch of the larger one to the secret door of her
dressing-room.

My suite—drawing-room, bedroom, and a pretty morning-room in scarlet
and gold—lies in the wing on the Invalides side. The house is only
separated from the boulevard by a creeper-covered wall and a splendid
avenue of trees, which mingle with the young elms on the sidewalk. But
for the blue-and-gold dome of the Invalides and its gray mass, you might
be in a wood.

The style and situation indicate these were the old show suite of the
duchesses, while the dukes had theirs opposite. The two suites are
separated by the main blocks and a central one, which contained vast,
resounding halls shown me by Philippe, all despoiled of their splendor,
as in my childhood.

Philippe grew confidential seeing my surprise. In this home of diplomacy
the very servants have a reserved air. He told me it was expected a law
would soon restore to the fugitives of the Revolution the value of their
property, and that my father waits to do up his house till this
restitution is made—the king's architect having estimated damage at
three hundred thousand livres.

This news flung me back despairing on my drawing-room sofa. Could it be
my father, instead of spending this money in arranging a marriage for
me, would have left me to die in the convent? This was the first thought
to greet me on the threshold of my home.

Ah! Renée, what would I have given then to rest my head upon your
shoulder, or to transport myself to the days when my grandmother made the
life of these rooms! You two in all the world have been alone in loving
me—you away at Maucombe, and she who survives only in my heart, the dear
old lady, whose still youthful eyes used to open from sleep at my call.
How well we understood each other!

These memories changed my mood. What at first seemed profanation now
breathed of holy association. It was sweet to inhale the faint odor of
the powder she loved still lingering; sweet to sleep beneath those yellow
damask curtains which must have retained something of the spirit
emanating from her. I told Philippe to rub up the old furniture and
make the rooms look as if lived in; I explained how I wanted things
arranged, and where to put each piece. In this way I entered into
possession and showed how youth might be given to the dear old things.

The bedroom is white, a little dulled with time, the gilding of the
arabesques showing patches of red, which harmonize with the faded
colors of the Savonnerie tapestry presented to my grandmother by Louis
XV., along with his portrait. The timepiece was a gift from the
Maréchal de Saxe, and the china ornaments on the mantelpiece came from
the Maréchal de Richelieu. My grandmother's portrait, painted at twenty-five,
hangs opposite the King's. The Prince, her husband, is conspicuous by
his absence. I like this frank negligence—untinctured by hypocrisy—a
characteristic touch summing her charming personality. Once when she was
seriously ill, her confessor urged the Prince, waiting in the drawing-room,
should be admitted.

"He can come in with the doctor and his drugs," she replied.

The bed has a canopy and well-stuffed back, the curtains looped up with
wide bands. The furniture is gilded wood, upholstered in the same yellow
damask lined with white silk that looks watered. The panels over the
doors represent a sunrise and a moonlight scene.

The fireplace is interesting—life in the last century centered round the
hearth. The copper gilt grate is a marvel, the mantelpiece delicately
finished; fire-irons beautifully chased; the bellows a perfect gem.
The tapestry screen comes from the Gobelins and is exquisitely mounted;
fantastic figures run all over the frame. Dearly would I like to know who
gave this dainty work, such a favorite with her. How often have I seen
the old lady, feet on the bar, reclining in the easy-chair, with her
dress half raised, toying with the snuff-box on the ledge between her
pastilles and silk mitts. What a coquette she was! To the day of her
death she took pains with her appearance as though her portrait had been
painted only yesterday, and she were waiting to receive exquisites from
the Court! How the armchair recalls to me the inimitable sweep of her skirts!

Women of a past generation carried off secrets typical of their age.
The Princess had a turn of the head, a way of dropping her glance and
remarks, a choice of words I look for in vain even in my mother. There
was subtlety and good nature; points were made without affectation. Her
talk was lengthy and concise; she told a good story and could put her
meaning in three words. Above all, she was free-thinking, which has
influenced my outlook.

From seven till ten I never left her side; it pleased her to attract me,
and pleased me to go. This preference caused more than one passage at
arms between her and my mother, and nothing intensifies feeling like the
icy breath of persecution. How charming was her greeting, "Here you are,
little rogue!" when curiosity had taught me to glide to her room. She
felt I loved her, and this childish affection was a ray of sunshine in
the winter of her life.

I don't know what went on in her rooms at night, but she had many visitors;
and when I came on tiptoe in the morning to see if she were awake, I would
find the drawing-room furniture disarranged, card-tables set out, and
patches of snuff scattered about.

This drawing-room is furnished in the same style as the bedroom. The
chairs and tables are oddly shaped, with claw feet and hollow mouldings.
Rich garlands of flowers wind over the mirrors and hang down in festoons.
On the consoles are fine china vases. The ground colors are scarlet and
white. My grandmother was high-spirited, a striking brunette, as suggested
by her choice of colors. I found a writing-table I remember; the
figures on it used to fascinate me: plaited in graven silver, a present
from one of the Genoese Lomellini. Each side represents occupations of a
season; hundreds of figures in relief.

I remained alone for two hours, while memories rose before me
one after another on this spot hallowed by the death of a remarkable woman.

You know how abruptly I was parted from her, at a day's notice, in 1816.

"Go and bid good-bye to your grandmother," said my mother.

The Princess received me as usual, without display, expressing no surprise
at my departure.

"You are going to the convent, dear," she said, "and will see your aunt,
who is an excellent woman. I shall take care they don't make a victim of
you; you shall be independent and able to marry whom you please."

Six months later she died. Her will was given into the keeping of the
Prince de Talleyrand, the most devoted of her old friends. He contrived,
while paying a visit to Mlle. de Chargeboeuf, to intimate to me through
her that my grandmother forbade me to take the vows. I hope, sooner or
later, to meet the Prince, and then I shall doubtless learn more from him.

Thus, sweetheart, if I have found no one in flesh to meet me, I have
comforted myself with the shade of the Princess, and prepared to carry
out one of our pledges—to keep each other informed of the smallest
details in our homes. It makes a difference to know where and how the life
of one we love is passed. Send me a faithful picture of the veriest
trifles around you, omitting nothing, not even the sunset lights among
the tall trees.

October 19th.

It was three in the afternoon when I arrived. About half-past five, Rose
told me my mother had returned, so I went downstairs to pay my respects.

My mother lives in a suite on the ground floor, exactly corresponding to
mine, and in the same block. I am just over her head, and the same secret
staircase serves both. My father's rooms are opposite, but larger by the
space occupied by the grand staircase on our side. These ancestral
mansions are so spacious that my father and mother continue to occupy
the ground-floor rooms, despite the social duties devolving on them with
the return of the Bourbons, and can receive there.

I found my mother dressed for the evening, where nothing is changed.
I came slowly down the stairs, speculating how I should be met by this
mother who had shown herself so little of a mother to me, from whom, during
eight years, I had heard only two letters. Judging it unworthy to simulate
an affection I could not feel, I put on the air of a pious imbecile, and
entered with many inward qualms, which soon disappeared. My mother's tack
was equal to the occasion. She made no pretence of emotion; she neither
held me at arm's length nor hugged me to her bosom like a beloved daughter,
but greeted me as though we had parted the evening before. Her manner was
that of the kindliest and most sincere friend, as she addressed me like
a grown person, first kissing me on the forehead.

"My dear little one," she said, "if you were to die at the convent it is
much better to live with your family. You frustrate your father's plans
and mine; but the age of blind obedience to parents is past. M. de
Chaulieu's intention, and I am at one with him, is to lose no opportunity
of making your life pleasant and of letting you see the world. At your age
I should have thought as you do, therefore I am not vexed; it is impossible
you should understand what we expected from you. You will not find absurd
severity in me; and if you have thought me heartless you will soon find
out your mistake. Still, though I wish you to feel perfectly free, I think,
to begin with, you would do well to follow the counsels of a mother who
wishes to be a sister to you."

I was charmed by the Duchess, who talked in a gentle voice, straightening
my convent tippet as she spoke. At thirty-eight she is still exquisitely
beautiful—dark-blue eyes with silken lashes, a smooth forehead, a
complexion so pink and white you might think she paints. Her bust and
shoulders are marvelous, her waist slender. Her hand is milk-white and
extraordinarily beautiful; the nails catch the light, the thumb like
ivory, the little finger stands apart; the foot matches the hand; it is
the Spanish foot of Mlle. de Vandenesse. If she is like this at forty,
at sixty she will still be beautiful.

I replied, sweetheart, like a good little girl. I was as nice to her
as she to me, nay, nicer. Her beauty vanquished me; it seemed natural
that such a woman should be absorbed in her regal part. I told her this
simply. I daresay it surprised her to hear words of affection from her
daughter, and the unfeigned homage of my admiration touched her deeply.
Her manner changed and became more engaging; she dropped formality and
said:

"I am much pleased with you, and I hope we shall remain good friends."

The words struck me as charmingly naive, but I did not let it appear,
for I saw the prudent course was to allow her to believe herself much
deeper and cleverer than her daughter. So I only stared vacantly and she
was delighted. I kissed her hands repeatedly, telling her how happy it
made me to be so treated and to feel at my ease. I even confided my
previous tremors. She smiled, put her arm round my neck, and drawing me
towards her, kissed my forehead most affectionately.

"Dear child," she said, "we have people coming to dinner to-day. Perhaps
you will agree with me that it is better for you not to make your first
appearance in society till you have been in the dressmaker's hands; so,
after you have seen your father and brother, you can go upstairs again."

I assented heartily. My mother's exquisite dress was the first revelation
to me of the world our dreams had pictured; but I did not feel the desire
to rival her.

My father now entered, and the Duchess presented me to him.

He became affectionate, playing the father's part so well that I could
not but believe his heart in it. Taking my hands and kissing them, with
more of the lover than the father in his manner, he said:

"So this is my rebel daughter!"

He drew me towards him, arm round my waist, and kissed me on cheeks and
forehead.

"The pleasure with which we shall watch your success in society will
atone for the disappointment we felt at your change of vocation," he
said. Then, turning to my mother, "Do you know she is going to turn
out very pretty, and you will be proud of her some day?—Here is your
brother, Rhetore.—Alphonse," he said to a fine young man who came in,
"here is your convent-bred sister, who threatens to send her nun's frock
to the deuce."

My brother came up leisurely and took my hand, which he pressed.

"Come, come, you may kiss her," said my father.

And he kissed me on both cheeks.

"I am delighted to see you," he said, "and I take your side against my
father."

I thanked him, but could not help thinking he might have come to Blois
when he was at Orléans visiting our Marquis brother in his quarters.

Fearing strangers, I withdrew. I tidied my rooms and laid out on the
scarlet velvet of my lovely table all materials necessary for writing to
you, meditating on my new situation.

This, my fair sweetheart, is a true account of the return of a girl of
eighteen, after an absence of nine years, to the bosom of one of the
noblest families in the kingdom. I was tired by the journey as well as
by emotions, so I went to bed in convent fashion at eight o'clock after
supper. They have preserved even a little Saxe service which the dear
Princess used when she had a fancy for taking her meals alone.

II. THE SAME TO THE SAME November 25th.

Next day I found my rooms dusted and flowers put in the vases by old
Philippe. I began to feel at home. Only it didn't occur to anybody that
a Carmelite schoolgirl has an early appetite, and Rose had trouble in
getting breakfast for me.

"Mlle. goes to bed at dinner-time," she said, "and gets up when the
Duke is returning home."

I began to write. About one o'clock my father knocked at the small
drawing-room door and asked to come in. I opened; he found me writing to
you.

"My dear," he began, "you will have to get yourself clothes and make
these rooms comfortable. In this purse you will find twelve thousand
francs, which is the yearly income I purpose allowing you for expenses.
You will arrange with your mother about some governess if Miss Griffith
doesn't please you, for Mme. de Chaulieu will not have time to go out
with you mornings. A carriage and man-servant shall be at your disposal."

"Let me keep Philippe," I said.

"So be it," he replied. "Don't be uneasy; you have money enough of your
own to be no burden to your mother or me."

"May I ask how much I have?"

"Certainly, my child," he said. "Your grandmother left you five hundred
thousand francs; this was the amount of her savings, for she would not
alienate a foot of land from the family. This sum has been placed in
Government stock, and with accumulated interest brings in about forty
thousand francs a year. With this I had purposed making an independence
for your second brother, and it is here that you have upset my plans.
Later, however, it is possible you may fall in with them. It shall rest
with yourself, for I have confidence in your good sense far more than I
had expected.

"I do not need to tell you how a daughter of the Chaulieus ought to
behave. The pride so plainly written in your features is my best
guarantee. Safeguards such as common folk surround their daughters with
would be an insult in our family. A slander on your name might cost the life
of the man bold enough to utter it, or the life of one of your brothers,
if by chance the right should not prevail. No more on this subject. Good-bye,
little one."

He kissed me on the forehead and went out. I cannot understand the
relinquishment of this plan after nine years' persistence in it. My
father's frankness pleases me. My money ought to belong to his Marquis son.
Who, then, had mercy? My mother? My father? Or my brother?

I remained on my grandmother's sofa, staring at the purse my father had
left on the mantelpiece, pleased and vexed that I could not withdraw my
mind from the money. It is true, further speculation was useless. My
doubts had been cleared up and there was something fine in the way my
pride was spared.

Philippe spent the morning rushing among shops and workpeople to undertake
my metamorphosis. A famous dressmaker, Victorine, came, as well as a
woman for underclothing, and a shoemaker. I am impatient to know what I
shall be like when I emerge from the convent uniform; but tradespeople
take time; the corset-maker requires a week if my figure is not to be
spoiled. You see, I have a figure; this becomes serious. Janssen, the
Operatic shoemaker, solemnly assures me I have my mother's foot. The
morning went in these weighty occupations. Even a glovemaker came to
measure my hand. The underclothing woman has my orders.

At the meal I call dinner, my mother told me we were going together to the
milliner's to see hats, so that my taste should be formed and I might
order my own.

This burst of independence dazzles me. I am like a blind man who has
just recovered sight. Now I begin to understand the vast interval which
separates a Carmelite sister from a girl in society. Of ourselves we could
never have conceived it.

During this lunch my father seemed absent-minded; we left him to his
thoughts; he is deep in the King's confidence. I was forgotten; but from
what I have seen I have no doubt he will remember me when he needs me.
He is attractive despite fifty years—youthful figure, graceful, with a
diplomatic face, long slender nose, and brown eyes.

What a handsome pair! Strange thoughts assail me as it becomes plain that
these two, so perfectly matched in birth, wealth, and mental superiority,
live apart and have nothing in common but their name. The show of unity
is only for the world.

The cream of Court and diplomatic circles were here last night. Very soon
I go to a ball given by the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse, and I shall be
presented to the society I am eager to know. A dancing-master is coming
every morning to give lessons; I must dance in a month, or I can't go to
the ball.

Before dinner my mother came to talk about the governess. I have decided
to keep Miss Griffith, recommended by the English ambassador. Miss
Griffith is the daughter of a clergyman; her mother was of good family,
and she is perfectly well bred. She is thirty-six and will teach me
English. The good soul is handsome enough to have ambitions; she is
Scotch—poor and proud—and will act as my chaperon. She is to sleep in
Rose's room. Rose will be under her orders. I saw at a glance that my
governess would be governed by me. In six days she has made sure I am the
only person likely to take an interest in her; while I have ascertained
that, for all her statuesque features, she will prove accommodating. She
seems a kindly soul but cautious. I have not extracted a word of what
passed between her and my mother.

Another trifling piece of news! My father this morning refused the
appointment as Minister of State offered him. This explains his
preoccupied manner. He says he prefers an embassy to the worries of
public debate. Spain attracts him.

This news was told me at lunch, the one moment when my father, mother,
and brother see each other in an easy way. The servants come only when
they are rung for. The rest of the day my brother, as well as my father,
spends out; my mother has her toilet to make; between two and four she
is never visible; at four she goes out for an hour's drive; when not
dining out she receives from six to seven, and the evening is given to
entertainment—theatres, balls, concerts. In short, her life is so full I
don't believe she ever has a quarter of an hour to herself. She must
spend considerable time dressing in the morning; for at lunch, between
eleven and twelve, she is exquisite. The meaning of the things said about
her dawns on me. She begins the day with a bath barely warmed, and a cup
of cold coffee with cream; then she dresses. She is never, except on some
great emergency, called before nine o'clock. In summer there are morning
rides, and at two she receives a young man I have not yet contrived to
see.

Behold our family life! We meet at lunch and dinner, though often I am
alone with my mother at the latter, and I foresee I shall more often take
it in my rooms with Miss Griffith for company, following my grandmother,
for my mother frequently dines out. I have ceased to wonder at the
indifference my family have shown me. In Paris, it is a miracle of virtue
to love those you live with, for you see little of them; as for the
absent—they do not exist!

Knowing as this may sound, I have not yet set foot in the streets, and am
deplorably ignorant. I must wait till I am less of a country cousin and
have my dress and deportment in keeping with the society I enter, a whirl
which amazes me even here, where only distant murmurs reach my ear. So
far I have not gone beyond the garden; but the Italian opera opens in a
few days, and my mother has a box. I am crazy with delight at the thought
of hearing Italian music and seeing French acting.

Already I begin to drop convent habits for those of society. I spend the
evening writing to you till bedtime. This has been postponed to ten
o'clock, the hour my mother goes out if she is not at the theatre. There
are twelve theatres in Paris.

I am grossly ignorant and I read a lot, but indiscriminately—one book
leading to another. I find names of fresh books on the cover of the one
I am reading; but as I have no one to direct me, I light on some fearfully
dull. What modern literature I have read turns on love, the subject that
used to bulk so largely in our thoughts, seeming our fate. But how
inferior are these authors to two little girls known as Sweetheart and
Darling—Renée and Louise. Ah! my love, what wretched plots, what
ridiculous situations, and what poverty of sentiment! Two books,
however, gave me wonderful pleasure—Corinne and Adolphe. Apropos, I
asked my father one day whether it would be possible for me to see Mme.
de Staël. My father, mother, and Alphonse burst out laughing, and
Alphonse said:

"Where in the world has she sprung from?"

To which my father replied:

"What fools we are! She springs from the Carmelites."

"My child, Mme. de Staël is dead," said my mother gently.

When I finished Adolphe, I asked Miss Griffith how a woman could be
betrayed.

"Why, of course, when she loves," was her reply.

Renée, tell me, do you think we could be betrayed by a man?

Miss Griffith has at last discerned I am not an utter ignoramus, that I
have somewhere a hidden vein of knowledge—the knowledge learned between
us in random arguments. She sees it is only superficial facts of which I
am ignorant. The poor thing has opened her heart to me. Her curt reply
to my question, compared with all the sorrows I can imagine, makes me
feel quite creepy. Once more she urged me not to be dazzled by society's
glitter, to be always on my guard, especially against what most attracts
me. This is her wisdom, and I can get nothing more out of her. Her
lectures become monotonous, like a bird with only one cry.

III. THE SAME TO THE SAME December.

My Darling,—Here I am ready to make my bow to the world. By way of
preparation I have been trying to commit all the follies I could think of
before sobering down for my entry. This morning I have seen myself,
after many rehearsals, well and duly equipped—stays, shoes, curls,
dress, ornaments—all in order. Following the example of duelists before
a meeting, I tried my arms in the privacy of my chamber. I wanted to see
how I would look, and had no difficulty in discovering a certain air of
victory and triumph, bound to carry all before it. I mustered my forces
in accordance with that splendid maxim, "Know thyself!" and boundless
was my delight in thus making my acquaintance. Griffith was sole
spectator of this doll's play, in which I was both doll and child. You
think you know me? You are hugely mistaken.

Here is a portrait, Renée, of your sister, formerly disguised as a
Carmelite, now brought to life as a frivolous society girl. She is one of
the greatest beauties in France—Provence excepted. I don't see that I
can give a more accurate summary of this interesting topic.

True, I have weak points; but were I a man, I should adore them. They
arise from what is most promising in me. When you have spent a fortnight
admiring your mother's exquisite arms, and that mother the Duchesse de
Chaulieu, it is impossible not to deplore your own angular elbows.
Yet there is consolation in the fineness of the wrist, and a certain
grace in those hollows, which will fill out and show plump and well
modeled under satiny skin. The crude outline of the arms is seen again
in the shoulders. Strictly speaking, I have no shoulders, but two bony
blades in harsh relief. My figure lacks pliancy; there is stiffness about
the side lines.

Poof! There's the worst out. But then the contours are bold and delicate,
the bright flame of health bites into the vigorous lines, a flood of life
and blue blood pulses under transparent skin, and the fairest daughter
of Eve would seem a Negress beside me! I have the foot of a gazelle! My
joints are finely turned, my features of Greek correctness. It is true
the flesh tints do not melt into each other; but at least they stand out
clear and bright. In short, I am a pretty green fruit, with all the charm
of unripeness. I see a likeness to the face in my aunt's old missal, which
rises out of a violet lily.

There is no silly weakness in the blue of my insolent eyes; the white is
pure mother-of-pearl, prettily marked with tiny veins, and the thick,
long lashes fall like a silken fringe. My forehead sparkles, and the
hair ripples into waves of pale gold, browner towards the center, whence
escape little rebel locks telling my fairness is not insipid. I am a
tropical blonde, with plenty of blood in my veins, a blonde more apt to
strike than to blush. What did the hairdresser propose? He wanted to
smooth my hair into two bands and place over my forehead a pearl kept in
place by a gold chain—recalling the Middle Ages.

I told him I was not aged enough to have reached the middle, nor needed
an ornament to freshen me!

The nose is slender, the well-cut nostrils separated by a sweet pink
partition—an imperious, mocking nose, with a tip too sensitive ever to
grow fat or red. Sweetheart, if this won't find a husband for a
dowerless maiden, I'm a donkey. The ears are daintily curled; a pearl
from either lobe would show yellow. The neck is long, with undulating
motion full of dignity. In shade the white ripens to a golden tinge.
Perhaps the mouth is a little large. But how expressive! what a color on
the lips! how prettily the teeth laugh!

Then, dear, there is a harmony running through all. What a gait! what a
voice! We have not forgotten how our grandmother's skirts fell into place
without a touch. In a word, I am lovely and charming. When the mood comes
I can laugh one of our good old laughs, and no one will think the less of
me; the dimples, impressed by Comedy's light fingers on my fair cheeks,
will command respect. Or I can let my eyes fall and my heart freeze under
my snowy brows. I can pose as a Madonna with a melancholy, swan-like
neck, and the painters' virgins will be nowhere; my place in heaven would
be far above them. A man would be forced to chant when he spoke to me.

So, you see, my panoply is complete, and I can run the whole gamut of
coquetry from deepest bass to shrillest treble. It is a huge advantage
not to be all of one piece. My mother is neither playful nor virginal.
Her only attitude is imposing; when she ceases to be majestic she is
ferocious. It is difficult for her to heal wounds she makes, whereas I
can wound and heal together. We are absolutely unlike, and therefore no
rivalry, unless we quarreled over the greater or less perfection of our
extremities, which are similar. I take after my father, who is shrewd
and subtle. I have my grandmother's manner and her charming voice, which
becomes falsetto when forced, but is a sweet-toned chest voice in quiet
talk.

I feel as if I had left the convent to-day for the first time. For
society I do not yet exist; I am unknown to it. What a ravishing moment!
I still belong only to myself, like a flower just blown, unseen by mortal eye.

In spite of this, my sweet, as I paced the drawing-room during my
self-inspection, and saw the poor cast-off school-clothes, a queer
feeling came over me. Regret for the past, anxiety about the future,
fear of society, a long farewell to the pale daisies we used to pick,
there was something of all that; but strange, fantastic visions also rose,
which I crushed back into the inner depths, whence they had sprung, and
whither I dared not follow them.

My Renée, I have a regular trousseau! It is all beautifully laid away
and perfumed in the cedar-wood drawers of my charming dressing-table.
There are ribbons, shoes, gloves, all in lavish abundance. My father has
presented me with the pretty gewgaws a girl loves—a dressing-case, toilet
service, scent-box, fan, sunshade, prayer-book, gold chain, cashmere
shawl. He has promised riding lessons. And I can dance! To-morrow evening
I come out!

My dress is white muslin, and on my head I wear a garland of white
roses in Greek style. I shall put on my Madonna face; I mean to play the
simpleton and have all the women on my side. My mother is miles from any
idea of what I write to you. She believes me quite destitute of mind and
would be dumfounded if she read my letter. My brother honors me with a
profound contempt, and is uniformly and politely indifferent.

He is a handsome young fellow, but melancholy and given to moods. I have
divined his secret, though neither Duke nor Duchess has an inkling. In
spite of his youth and title, he is jealous of his father. He has no
position in the State, no post at Court; he never has to say, "I am going
to the Chamber." I alone in the house have sixteen hours for meditation.
My father is absorbed in public business and his own amusements; my
mother, too, is never at leisure; no member of the household practises
self-examination, they are constantly in company and hardly have time to
live.

I should like to know what potent charm keeps people prisoner from nine
every evening till two or three in the morning, and forces lavishness of
strength and money. When I longed for it, I had no idea of the separations
it brought about or its overmastering spell. But then I forget: Paris does
it all.

It is possible for members of one family to live side by side and know
nothing of each other. A half-fledged nun arrives, and in a couple of
weeks grasps domestic details of which the master diplomatist at the head
of the house is ignorant. Or perhaps he does see and shuts his eyes
deliberately, as part of the father's role. There is a mystery here which
I must plumb.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
IV. THE SAME TO THE SAME December 15th.

Yesterday at two I went to drive in the Champs-Élysées and the Bois de Boulogne. It was one of those autumn days we used to find so beautiful on the Loire. So I have seen Paris at last! The Place Louis XV is certainly fine, but its beauty is that of man's handiwork.

I was dressed to perfection, pensive, with set face (though inwardly much tempted to laugh), under a lovely hat, my arms crossed. Would you believe it? Not a single smile was thrown at me, not one youth was struck motionless as I passed, not a soul turned to look again; nevertheless the carriage proceeded with a deliberation worthy of my pose.

No, I am wrong—there was one—a duke, and a charming man—who suddenly reined in as we went by. The individual who thus saved appearances for me was my father, and he declared himself highly gratified. I met my mother also, who sent me a butterfly kiss from her fingertips. The worthy Griffith, who fears no man, cast her glances hither and thither without discrimination. In my judgment, a young woman should always know exactly what her eye is resting on.

I was mad with rage. One man actually inspected my carriage without noticing me. This flattering homage probably came from a carriage-maker. I have been quite out in the reckoning of my forces. Plainly, beauty, that rare gift from heaven, is commoner in Paris than I thought. I saw hats doffed with deference to simpering fools; a purple face called forth murmurs of "It is she!" My mother received an immense amount of admiration. There is an answer to this problem, and I mean to find it.

The men, my dear, seemed generally very ugly. The few exceptions are bad copies of us. Heaven knows what evil genius has inspired their costume; it is amazingly inelegant compared with former generations. It has no distinction, color, or romance; it appeals neither to sense nor mind, and must be very uncomfortable. It is meagre and stunted. The hat, above all, struck me; it is a sort of truncated column, and does not adapt itself to the shape of the head; but I am told it is easier to bring about a revolution than to invent a graceful hat. Courage in Paris recoils before the thought of appearing in a round felt; and for lack of one day's daring, men stick all their lives to this ridiculous headpiece. And yet Frenchmen are said to be fickle!

The men are hideous anyway, whatever they put on their heads. I have seen nothing but worn, hard faces, with no calm or peace in the expression; the harsh lines and furrows speak of foiled ambition and smarting vanity. A fine forehead is rarely seen.

"And these are the product of Paris!" I said to Miss Griffith.

"Most cultivated and pleasant men," she replied.

I was silent. The heart of a spinster of thirty-six is a well of tolerance.

In the evening I went to the ball, where I kept close to my mother's side. She gave me her arm with a devotion which did not miss its reward. All the honors were for her; I was made the pretext for charming compliments. She was clever enough to find me fools for my partners, who one and all expatiated on the heat and the beauty of the ball, till you might suppose I was freezing and blind. Not one failed to enlarge on the strange, unheard-of, extraordinary fact—that he saw me for the first time.

My dress, which had dazzled me as I paraded alone in my white-and-gold drawing-room, was barely noticeable amidst the gorgeous finery of most of the married women. Each had her band of faithful followers, and they all watched each other askance. A few were radiant in triumphant beauty, and amongst these was my mother. A girl at a ball is a mere dancing-machine—a thing of no consequence whatever.

The men, with rare exceptions, did not impress me more favorably there than at the Champs-Élysées. They have a used-up look; their features are meaningless, or rather they all have the same expression. The proud, stalwart bearing we find in the portraits of our ancestors—men who joined moral to physical vigor—has disappeared. Yet in this gathering there was one man of remarkable ability, who stood out by the beauty of his face. But even he did not rouse in me the feeling I should have expected. He is a man of no family whose works I do not know. Whatever the genius and merits of a plebeian, he could never stir my blood. Besides, this man was obviously so much more taken up with himself than with anybody else, that I could not but think these great brain-workers must look on us as things rather than persons. When men of intellectual power love, they ought to give up writing; otherwise their love is not the real thing. The lady of their heart does not come first in all their thoughts. I seemed to read this in his bearing. They say he is a professor, orator, and author, whose ambition makes him the slave of every bigwig.

My mind was made up on the spot. It was unworthy of me, I determined, to quarrel with society for not being impressed by my merits, and I gave myself up to the simple pleasure of dancing, which I thoroughly enjoyed. I heard a great deal of inept gossip about people of whom I know nothing; perhaps my ignorance prevents me from appreciating it, since most men and women took a lively pleasure in certain remarks, whether from their own lips or those of others. Society bristles with enigmas and is a perfect maze of intrigue. Yet I am fairly quick of sight and hearing, and as to my wits, Mlle. de Maucombe does not need to be told!

I returned home tired with a pleasant sort of fatigue, and in all innocence began describing my sensations to my mother, who was with me. She checked me with the warning that I must never say such things to anyone but her.

"My dear child," she added, "it needs as much tact to know when to be silent as when to speak."

This advice brought home to me the nature of the sensations which ought to be concealed from everyone, not excepting perhaps even a mother. At a glance I measured the vast field of feminine duplicity. I can assure you, sweetheart, that we, in our unabashed simplicity, would pass for two very wide-awake little scandal-mongers. What lessons may be conveyed in a finger on the lips, in a word, a look! All in a moment I was seized with excessive shyness. What! may I never again speak of the natural pleasure I feel in the exercise of dancing? "How then," I said to myself, "about the deeper feelings?"

I went to bed sorrowful, and I still suffer from the shock of this first collision of my frank, joyous nature with the harsh laws of society. Already the highway hedges are flecked with my white wool! Farewell, beloved.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
V. RENEE DE MAUCOMBE TO LOUISE DE CHAULIEU October.

How deeply your letter moved me; above all, when I compare our widely different destinies! How brilliant is the world you are entering, how peaceful the retreat where I shall end my modest career!

In the Castle of Maucombe, which you know well by description, I found my room much as I left it; only now I can enjoy the splendid view it gives of the Gemenos valley, which my childish eyes once saw without comprehending. A fortnight after my arrival, my father and mother took me, with my two brothers, to dine with a neighbor, M. de l'Estorade, an elderly gentleman of good family who, after the provincial fashion, has made himself rich by scraping and paring.

M. de l'Estorade was unable to save his only son from Bonaparte; after evading conscription he had to send him to the army in 1813, to join the Emperor's bodyguard. After Leipsic no more was heard of him. M. de Montriveau, interviewed by the father in 1814, said he had seen him taken by the Russians. Mme. de l'Estorade died of grief while a vain search was made in Russia. The Baron, a very pious man, practised that hopeful theology we used to cultivate at Blois—Hope! Hope made him see his son in dreams. He hoarded his income and guarded carefully the portion of inheritance from the late Mme. de l'Estorade; no one ventured to ridicule him.

At last it dawned upon me that the unexpected return of this son was the cause of my own. Who could have imagined, while fancy led us a giddy dance, that my destined husband was slowly traveling on foot through Russia, Poland, and Germany? His ill luck only left him at Berlin, where the French Minister helped him return home. M. de l'Estorade, the father, who is a small landed proprietor in Provence with an income of about ten thousand livres, has not sufficient fame to interest the world in the wandering Chevalier de l'Estorade, whose name now recalls his adventures.

The accumulated income of twelve thousand livres from Mme. de l'Estorade's property, plus the father's savings, provides the poor guard of honor with about two hundred and fifty thousand livres, not counting house and lands—quite a considerable fortune in Provence. His worthy father had just bought, on the eve of the Chevalier's return, a fine but badly managed estate where he intends to plant ten thousand mulberry trees, raised in his nursery for this acquisition. Having found his long-lost son, the Baron now thinks only of marrying him well.

My parents agreed with their neighbor's design so soon as they discovered that Renée de Maucombe would be acceptable without a dowry, and that the money I should inherit from my parents would be acknowledged as mine in the contract. In a similar way, my younger brother Jean, on coming of age, signed a document acknowledging an advance upon the estate equal to one-third of the whole. This device is how the nobles of Provence elude the Civil Code of M. de Bonaparte—a code which will drive as many girls of good family into convents as it will find husbands for. From what I have learned, the French nobility seem divided on these matters.

The dinner, darling, was the first meeting between your sweetheart and the exile. The Comte de Maucombe's servants donned their old laced liveries and hats, the coachman his great top-boots; we sat five in the antiquated carriage, and arrived in state about two o'clock—the dinner was for three—at the grange, which is the dwelling of the Baron de l'Estorade.

My future father-in-law has, you see, no castle, only a simple country house beneath one of our hills at the entrance of the noble valley, whose pride is the Castle of Maucombe. The building is unpretentious: four pebble walls washed yellow and roofed with hollow red tiles. The rafters bend under the weight of this roof. The windows are inserted without symmetry, and have enormous yellow shutters. The garden is a Provencal one, enclosed by low walls of big round pebbles, set according to the mason's taste. The mud in which they are set is falling away in places.

Thanks to an iron railing at the entrance facing the road, this simple farm has a certain air of being a country-seat. The railing, long sought with tears, is so emaciated that it recalled Sister Angélique to me. A flight of stone steps leads to a door protected by a pent-house roof such as no peasant on the Loire would tolerate for his coquettish white-stone house with its blue roof. The garden and walks are horribly dusty, the trees seem burned. It is easy to see that for years the Baron's life has been a mere rising and going to bed again, day after day, without thought beyond piling up coppers. He eats the same food as his two servants, a Provencal lad and the old woman who used to wait on his wife. The rooms are scantily furnished.

Nevertheless, the house of l'Estorade had done its best; the cupboards had been ransacked, and its last man beaten up for the dinner, which was served on old silver dishes, blackened and battered. The exile, my darling, is like the railing, emaciated! He is pale and silent, bearing traces of suffering. At thirty-seven he might be fifty. The once-ebon locks of youth are streaked with white like a lark's wing. His fine blue eyes are cavernous; he is a little deaf, reminding one of the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.

Despite all this, I have graciously consented to become Mme. de l'Estorade and to receive a dowry of two hundred and fifty thousand livres, but only on the express condition of being allowed to work my will upon the grange and make a park there. I have demanded from my father, in set terms, a grant of water, which can be brought from Maucombe. In a month I shall be Mme. de l'Estorade; for, dear, I have made a good impression. After the snows of Siberia a man is ready enough to see merit in those black eyes which, according to you, used to ripen fruit with a look. Louis de l'Estorade seems well content to marry the fair Renée de Maucombe—such is your friend's splendid title.

Whilst you prepare to reap the joys of the many-sided existence that awaits a Chaulieu lady and to queen it in Paris, your poor little sweetheart, Renée, that child of the desert, has fallen from the empyrean where we once soared into the vulgar realities of a life as homely as a daisy's. I have vowed to comfort this young man, who never knew youth but passed straight from his mother's arms to war, and from the joys of his country home to the frosts and forced labor of Siberia.

Humble country pleasures will enliven the monotony of my future. It shall be my ambition to enlarge the oasis around my house and to give it the lordly shade of fine trees. My turf, though Provencal, shall be always green. I shall carry my park up the hillside and plant on the highest point some pretty kiosk, whence, perhaps, my eyes may catch the shimmer of the Mediterranean. Orange and lemon trees, and all choicest things that grow, shall embellish my retreat; and there will I be a mother among my children. The poetry of Nature, which nothing can destroy, shall hedge us round; and standing loyally at the post of duty, we need fear no danger. My religious feelings are shared by my father-in-law and by the Chevalier.

Ah! darling, my life unrolls before my eyes like one of the great highways of France, level and easy, shaded with evergreen trees. This century will not see another Bonaparte; and my children, if I have any, will not be rent from me. They will be mine to train and make men of—the joy of my life. If you also are true to your destiny, you who ought to find your mate among the great, the children of your Renée will not lack a zealous protectress.

Farewell, then, for me at least, to the romances and thrilling adventures in which we used to play heroines. The whole story of my life lies before me now; its great crises will be the teething and nourishment of the young Masters de l'Estorade, and the mischief they do to my shrubs and me. To embroider their caps, to be loved and admired by a sickly man at the mouth of the Gemenos valley—there are my pleasures. Perhaps some day the country dame may spend a winter in Marseilles; but danger does not haunt the purlieus of a narrow provincial stage. There will be nothing to fear, not even admiration that could make a woman proud. We shall take an interest in the silkworms for whose benefit our mulberry leaves will be sold! We shall know the strange vicissitudes of life in Provence and the storms that may attack even a peaceful household. Quarrels will be impossible, for M. de l'Estorade has formally announced that he will leave the reins in his wife's hands; and as I shall do nothing to remind him of this wise resolve, he is likely to persevere in it.

You, my dear Louise, will supply the romance of my life. So you must narrate to me in full all your adventures, describe your balls and parties, tell me what you wear, what flowers crown your lovely golden locks, and what are the words and manners of the men you meet. Your other self will be always there—listening, dancing, feeling her fingertips pressed—with you. If only I could have some fun in Paris now and then, while you played the house-mother at La Crampade! such is the name of our grange. Poor M. de l'Estorade, who fancies he is marrying one woman! Will he find out there are two?

I am writing nonsense now, and as henceforth I can only be foolish by proxy, I had better stop. One kiss, then, on each cheek—my lips are still virginal; he has only dared to take my hand. Oh! our deference and propriety are quite disquieting, I assure you. There, I am off again.... Good-bye, dear.

P.S.—I have just opened your third letter. My dear, I have about one thousand livres to dispose of; spend them for me on pretty things such as we can't find here, nor even at Marseilles. While speeding on your own business, give a thought to the recluse of La Crampade. Remember that on neither side have the heads of the family any people of taste in Paris to make their purchases. I shall reply to your letter later.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
VI. DON FELIPE HENAREZ TO DON FERNAND PARIS, September.

The address of this letter, my brother, will show you that the head of your house is out of reach of danger. If the massacre of our ancestors in the Court of Lions made Spaniards and Christians of us against our will, it left us a legacy of Arab cunning; and it may be that I owe my safety to the blood of the Abencerrages still flowing in my veins.

Fear made Ferdinand's acting so good that Valdez actually believed his protestations. But for me the poor Admiral would have been done for. Nothing, it seems, will teach the Liberals what a king is. This particular Bourbon has been long known to me; and the more His Majesty assured me of his protection, the stronger grew my suspicions. A true Spaniard has no need to repeat a promise. A flow of words is a sure sign of duplicity.

Valdez took ship on an English vessel. For myself, no sooner had I seen the cause of my beloved Spain wrecked in Andalusia than I wrote to the steward of my Sardinian estate to make arrangements for my escape. Some hardy coral fishers were despatched to wait for me at a point on the coast; and when Ferdinand urged the French to secure my person, I was already in my barony of Macumer, amidst brigands who defy all law and all avengers.

The last Hispano-Moorish family of Granada has found once more the shelter of an African desert, and even a Saracen horse, in an estate which comes to it from Saracens. How the eyes of these brigands--who but yesterday had dreaded my authority--sparkled with savage joy and pride when they found they were protecting against the King of Spain's vendetta the Duc de Soria, their master and a Henarez--the first who had come to visit them since the time when the island belonged to the Moors. More than a score of rifles were ready to point at Ferdinand of Bourbon, son of a race which was still unknown when the Abencerrages arrived as conquerors on the banks of the Loire.

My idea had been to live on the income of these huge estates, which, unfortunately, we have so greatly neglected; but my stay there convinced me that this was impossible, and that Queverdo's reports were only too correct. The poor man had twenty-two lives at my disposal, and not a single real; prairies of twenty thousand acres, and not a house; virgin forests, and not a stick of furniture! A million piastres and a resident master for half a century would be necessary to make these magnificent lands pay. I must see to this.

The conquered have time during their flight to ponder their own case and that of their vanquished party. At the spectacle of my noble country, a corpse for monks to prey on, my eyes filled with tears; I read in it the presage of Spain's gloomy future.

At Marseilles I heard of Riego's end. Painfully did it come home to me that my life also would henceforth be a martyrdom, but a martyrdom protracted and unnoticed. Is existence worthy the name, when a man can no longer die for his country or live for a woman? To love, to conquer, this twofold form of the same thought, is the law graven on our sabres, emblazoned on the vaulted roofs of our palaces, ceaselessly whispered by the water which rises and falls in our marble fountains. But in vain does it nerve my heart; the sabre is broken, the palace in ashes, the living spring sucked up by the barren sand.

Here, then, is my last will and testament.

Don Fernand, you will understand now why I put a check upon your ardor and ordered you to remain faithful to the rey netto. As your brother and friend, I implore you to obey me; as your master, I command. You will go to the King and will ask from him the grant of my dignities and property, my office and titles. He will perhaps hesitate, and may treat you to some regal scowls; but you must tell him that you are loved by Marie Heredia, and that Marie can marry none but a Duc de Soria. This will make the King radiant. It is the immense fortune of the Heredia family which alone has stood between him and the accomplishment of my ruin. Your proposal will seem to him, therefore, to deprive me of a last resource, and he will gladly hand over to you my spoils.

You will then marry Marie. The secret of the mutual love against which you fought was no secret to me, and I have prepared the old Count to see you take my place. Marie and I were merely doing what was expected of us in our position and carrying out the wishes of our fathers; everything else is in your favor. You are beautiful as a child of love, and are possessed of Marie's heart. I am an ill-favored Spanish grandee, for whom she feels an aversion she will not confess. Some slight reluctance there may be on the part of the noble Spanish girl on account of my misfortunes, but this you will soon overcome.

Duc de Soria, your predecessor would neither cost you a regret nor rob you of a maravedi. My mother's diamonds, which will suffice to make me independent, I will keep, because the gap caused by them in the family estate can be filled by Marie's jewels. You can send them, therefore, by my nurse, old Urraca, the only one of my servants whom I wish to retain. No one can prepare my chocolate as she does.

During our brief revolution, my life of unremitting toil was reduced to the barest necessaries, and these my salary was sufficient to provide. You will therefore find the income of the last two years in the hands of your steward. This sum is mine; but a Duc de Soria cannot marry without a large expenditure of money, therefore we will divide it. You will not refuse this wedding-present from your brigand brother. Besides, I mean to have it so.

The barony of Macumer, not being Spanish territory, remains to me. Thus I have still a country and a name, should I wish to take up a position in the world again.

Thank Heaven, this finishes our business, and the house of Soria is saved!

At the very moment when I drop into simple Baron de Macumer, the French cannon announce the arrival of the Duc d'Angouleme. You will understand why I break off....

October.

When I arrived here I had not ten doubloons in my pocket. He would indeed be a poor sort of leader who, in the midst of calamities he has not been able to avert, has found means to feather his own nest. For the vanquished Moor there remains a horse and the desert; for the Christian foiled of his hopes, the cloister and a few gold pieces.

But my present resignation is mere weariness. I am not yet so near the monastery as to have abandoned all thoughts of life. Ozalga had given me several letters of introduction to meet all emergencies, among them one to a bookseller who takes with our fellow-countrymen the place which Galignani holds with the English in Paris. This man has found eight pupils for me at three francs a lesson. I go to my pupils every alternate day, so that I have four lessons a day and earn twelve francs, which is more than I require. When Urraca comes I shall make some Spanish exile happy by passing on to him my connection.

I lodge in the Rue Hillerin-Bertin with a poor widow who takes boarders. My room faces south and looks out on a little garden. It is perfectly quiet; I have green trees to look upon, and spend the sum of one piastre a day. I am amazed at the amount of calm, pure pleasure which I enjoy in this life, after the fashion of Dionysius at Corinth. From sunrise until ten o'clock I smoke and take my chocolate, sitting at my window and contemplating two Spanish plants, a broom which rises out of a clump of jessamine--gold on a white ground, colors which must send a thrill through any scion of the Moors. At ten o'clock I start for my lessons, which last till four, when I return for dinner. Afterwards I read and smoke till I go to bed.

I can put up for a long time with a life like this, compounded of work and meditation, of solitude and society. Be happy, therefore, Fernand; my abdication has brought no afterthoughts; I have no regrets like Charles V., no longing to try the game again like Napoleon. Five days and nights have passed since I wrote my will; to my mind they might have been five centuries. Honor, titles, wealth, are for me as though they had never existed.

Now that the conventional barrier of respect which hedged me round has fallen, I can open my heart to you, dear boy. Though cased in the armor of gravity, this heart is full of tenderness and devotion, which have found no object, and which no woman has divined, not even she who, from her cradle, has been my destined bride. In this lies the secret of my political enthusiasm. Spain has taken the place of a mistress and received the homage of my heart. And now Spain, too, is gone! Beggared of all, I can gaze upon the ruin of what once was me and speculate over the mysteries of my being.

Why did life animate this carcass, and when will it depart? Why has that race, pre-eminent in chivalry, breathed all its primitive virtues--its tropical love, its fiery poetry--into this its last offshoot, if the seed was never to burst its rugged shell, if no stem was to spring forth, no radiant flower scatter aloft its Eastern perfumes? Of what crime have I been guilty before my birth that I can inspire no love? Did fate from my very infancy decree that I should be stranded, a useless hulk, on some barren shore! I find in my soul the image of the deserts where my fathers ranged, illumined by a scorching sun which shrivels up all life. Proud remnant of a fallen race, vain force, love run to waste, an old man in the prime of youth, here better than elsewhere shall I await the last grace of death. Alas! under this murky sky no spark will kindle these ashes again to flame. Thus my last words may be those of Christ, My God, Thou hast forsaken me! Cry of agony and terror, to the core of which no mortal has ventured yet to penetrate!

You can realize now, Fernand, what a joy it is to me to live afresh in you and Marie. I shall watch you henceforth with the pride of a creator satisfied in his work. Love each other well and go on loving if you would not give me pain; any discord between you would hurt me more than it would yourselves.

Our mother had a presentiment that events would one day serve her wishes. It may be that the longing of a mother constitutes a pact between herself and God. Was she not, moreover, one of those mysterious beings who can hold converse with Heaven and bring back thence a vision of the future? How often have I not read in the lines of her forehead that she was coveting for Fernand the honors and the wealth of Felipe! When I said so to her, she would reply with tears, laying bare the wounds of a heart, which of right was the undivided property of both her sons, but which an irresistible passion gave to you alone.

Her spirit, therefore, will hover joyfully above your heads as you bow them at the altar. My mother, have you not a caress for your Felipe now that he has yielded to your favorite even the girl whom you regretfully thrust into his arms? What I have done is pleasing to our womankind, to the dead, and to the King; it is the will of God. Make no difficulty then, Fernand; obey, and be silent.

P. S. Tell Urraca to be sure and call me nothing but M. Henarez. Don't say a word about me to Marie. You must be the one living soul to know the secrets of the last Christianized Moor, in whose veins runs the blood of a great family, which took its rise in the desert and is now about to die out in the person of a solitary exile.

Farewell.

VII. LOUISE DE CHAULIEU TO RENEE DE MAUCOMBE

WHAT! To be married so soon. But this is unheard of. At the end of a month you become engaged to a man who is a stranger to you, and about whom you know nothing. The man may be deaf--there are so many kinds of deafness!--he may be sickly, tiresome, insufferable!

Don't you see, Renee, what they want with you? You are needful for carrying on the glorious stock of the l'Estorades, that is all. You will be buried in the provinces. Are these the promises we made each other? Were I you, I would sooner set off to the Hyeres islands in a caique, on the chance of being captured by an Algerian corsair and sold to the Grand Turk. Then I should be a Sultana some day, and wouldn't I make a stir in the harem while I was young--yes, and afterwards too!

You are leaving one convent to enter another. I know you; you are a coward, and you will submit to the yoke of family life with a lamblike docility. But I am here to direct you; you must come to Paris. There we shall drive the men wild and hold a court like queens. Your husband, sweetheart, in three years from now may become a member of the Chamber. I know all about members now, and I will explain it to you. You will work that machine very well; you can live in Paris, and become there what my mother calls a woman of fashion. Oh! you needn't suppose I will leave you in your grange!

Monday.

For a whole fortnight now, my dear, I have been living the life of society; one evening at the Italiens, another at the Grand Opera, and always a ball afterwards. Ah! society is a witching world. The music of the Opera enchants me; and whilst my soul is plunged in divine pleasure, I am the centre of admiration and the focus of all the opera-glasses. But a single glance will make the boldest youth drop his eyes.

I have seen some charming young men there; all the same, I don't care for any of them; not one has roused in me the emotion which I feel when I listen to Garcia in his splendid duet with Pellegrini in Otello. Heavens! how jealous Rossini must have been to express jealousy so well! What a cry in "Il mio cor si divide!" I'm speaking Greek to you, for you never heard Garcia, but then you know how jealous I am!

What a wretched dramatist Shakespeare is! Othello is in love with glory; he wins battles, he gives orders, he struts about and is all over the place while Desdemona sits at home; and Desdemona, who sees herself neglected for the silly fuss of public life, is quite meek all the time. Such a sheep deserves to be slaughtered. Let the man whom I deign to love beware how he thinks of anything but loving me!

For my part, I like those long trials of the old-fashioned chivalry. That lout of a young lord, who took offence because his sovereign-lady sent him down among the lions to fetch her glove, was, in my opinion, very impertinent, and a fool too. Doubtless the lady had in reserve for him some exquisite flower of love, which he lost, as he well deserved--the puppy!

But here am I running on as though I had not a great piece of news to tell you. My father is certainly going to represent our master the King at Madrid. I say our master, for I shall make part of the embassy. My mother wishes to remain here, and my father will take me so as to have some woman with him.

My dear, this seems to you, no doubt, very simple, but there are horrors behind it, all the same: in a fortnight I have probed the secrets of the house. My mother would accompany my father to Madrid if he would take M. de Canalis as a secretary to the embassy. But the King appoints the secretaries; the Duke dare neither annoy the King, who hates to be opposed, nor vex my mother; and the wily diplomat believes he has cut the knot by leaving the Duchess here. M. de Canalis, who is the great poet of the day, is the young man who cultivates my mother's society, and who no doubt studies diplomacy with her from three o'clock to five. Diplomacy must be a fine subject, for he is as regular as a gambler on the Stock Exchange.

The Duc de Rhetore, our elder brother, solemn, cold, and whimsical, would be extinguished by his father at Madrid, therefore he remains in Paris. Miss Griffith has found out also that Alphonse is in love with a ballet-girl at the Opera. How is it possible to fall in love with legs and pirouettes? We have noticed that my brother comes to the theatre only when Tullia dances there; he applauds the steps of this creature, and then goes out. Two ballet-girls in a family are, I fancy, more destructive than the plague. My second brother is with his regiment, and I have not yet seen him. Thus it comes about that I have to act as the Antigone of His Majesty's ambassador. Perhaps I may get married in Spain, and perhaps my father's idea is a marriage there without dowry, after the pattern of yours with this broken-down guard of honor. My father asked if I would go with him, and offered me the use of his Spanish master.

"Spain, the country for castles in the air!" I cried. "Perhaps you hope that it may mean marriages for me!"

For sole reply he honored me with a meaning look. For some days he has amused himself with teasing me at lunch; he watches me, and I dissemble. In this way I have played with him cruelly as father and ambassador in petto. Hadn't he taken me for a fool? He asked what I thought of this and that young man, and of some girls whom I had met in several houses. I replied with quite inane remarks on the color of their hair, their faces, and the difference in their figures. My father seemed disappointed at my crassness, and inwardly blamed himself for having asked me.

"Still, father," I added, "don't suppose I am saying what I really think: mother made me afraid the other day that I had spoken more frankly than I ought of my impressions."

"With your family you can speak quite freely," my mother replied.

"Very well, then," I went on. "The young men I have met so far strike me as too self-centered to excite interest in others; they are much more taken up with themselves than with their company. They can't be accused of lack of candor at any rate. They put on a certain expression to talk to us, and drop it again in a moment, apparently satisfied that we don't use our eyes. The man as he converses is the lover; silent, he is the husband. The girls, again, are so artificial that it is impossible to know what they really are, except from the way they dance; their figures and movements alone are not a sham. But what has alarmed me most in this fashionable society is its brutality. The little incidents which take place when supper is announced give one some idea--to compare small things with great--of what a popular rising might be. Courtesy is only a thin veneer on the general selfishness. I imagined society very different. Women count for little in it; that may perhaps be a survival of Bonapartist ideas."

"Armande is coming on extraordinarily," said my mother.

"Mother, did you think I should never get beyond asking to see Mme. de Stael?"

My father smiled, and rose from the table.

Saturday.

My dear, I have left one thing out. Here is the tidbit I have reserved for you. The love which we pictured must be extremely well hidden; I have seen not a trace of it. True, I have caught in drawing-rooms now and again a quick exchange of glances, but how colorless it all is! Love, as we imagined it, a world of wonders, of glorious dreams, of charming realities, of sorrows that waken sympathy, and smiles that make sunshine, does not exist. The bewitching words, the constant interchange of happiness, the misery of absence, the flood of joy at the presence of the beloved one--where are they? What soil produces these radiant flowers of the soul? Which is wrong? We or the world?

I have already seen hundreds of men, young and middle-aged; not one has stirred the least feeling in me. No proof of admiration and devotion on their part, not even a sword drawn in my behalf, would have moved me. Love, dear, is the product of such rare conditions that it is quite possible to live a lifetime without coming across the being on whom nature has bestowed the power of making one's happiness. The thought is enough to make one shudder; for if this being is found too late, what then?

For some days I have begun to tremble when I think of the destiny of women, and to understand why so many wear a sad face beneath the flush brought by the unnatural excitement of social dissipation. Marriage is a mere matter of chance. Look at yours. A storm of wild thoughts has passed over my mind. To be loved every day the same, yet with a difference, to be loved as much after ten years of happiness as on the first day!--such a love demands years. The lover must be allowed to languish, curiosity must be piqued and satisfied, feeling roused and responded to.

Is there, then, a law for the inner fruits of the heart, as there is for the visible fruits of nature? Can joy be made lasting? In what proportion should love mingle tears with pleasures? The cold policy of the funereal, monotonous, persistent routine of the convent seemed to me at these moments the only real life; while the wealth, the splendor, the tears, the delights, the triumph, the joy, the satisfaction, of a love equal, shared, and sanctioned, appeared a mere idle vision.

I see no room in this city for the gentle ways of love, for precious walks in shady alleys, the full moon sparkling on the water, while the suppliant pleads in vain. Rich, young, and beautiful, I have only to love, and love would become my sole occupation, my life; yet in the three months during which I have come and gone, eager and curious, nothing has appealed to me in the bright, covetous, keen eyes around me. No voice has thrilled me, no glance has made the world seem brighter.

Music alone has filled my soul, music alone has at all taken the place of our friendship. Sometimes, at night, I will linger for an hour by my window, gazing into the garden, summoning the future, with all it brings, out of the mystery which shrouds it. There are days too when, having started for a drive, I get out and walk in the Champs-Elysees, and picture to myself that the man who is to waken my slumbering soul is at hand, that he will follow and look at me. Then I meet only mountebanks, vendors of gingerbread, jugglers, passers-by hurrying to their business, or lovers who try to escape notice. These I am tempted to stop, asking them, "You who are happy, tell me what is love."

But the impulse is repressed, and I return to my carriage, swearing to die an old maid. Love is undoubtedly an incarnation, and how many conditions are needful before it can take place! We are not certain of never quarreling with ourselves, how much less so when there are two? This is a problem which God alone can solve.

I begin to think that I shall return to the convent. If I remain in society, I shall do things which will look like follies, for I cannot possibly reconcile myself to what I see. I am perpetually wounded either in my sense of delicacy, my inner principles, or my secret thoughts.

Ah! my mother is the happiest of women, adored as she is by Canalis, her great little man. My love, do you know I am seized sometimes with a horrible craving to know what goes on between my mother and that young man? Griffith tells me she has gone through all these moods; she has longed to fly at women, whose happiness was written in their face; she has blackened their character, torn them to pieces. According to her, virtue consists in burying all these savage instincts in one's innermost heart. But what then of the heart? It becomes the sink of all that is worst in us.

It is very humiliating that no adorer has yet turned up for me. I am a marriageable girl, but I have brothers, a family, relations, who are sensitive on the point of honor. Ah! if that is what keeps men back, they are poltroons.

The part of Chimene in the Cid and that of the Cid delight me. What a marvelous play! Well, good-bye.

VIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME January.

Our master is a poor refugee, forced to keep in hiding on account of the part he played in the revolution which the Duc d'Angouleme has just quelled--a triumph to which we owe some splendid fetes. Though a Liberal, and doubtless a man of the people, he has awakened my interest: I fancy that he must have been condemned to death. I make him talk for the purpose of getting at his secret; but he is of a truly Castilian taciturnity, proud as though he were Gonsalvo di Cordova, and nevertheless angelic in his patience and gentleness. His pride is not irritable like Miss Griffith's, it belongs to his inner nature; he forces us to civility because his own manners are so perfect, and holds us at a distance by the respect he shows us. My father declares that there is a great deal of the nobleman in Senor Henarez, whom, among ourselves, he calls in fun Don Henarez.

A few days ago I took the liberty of addressing him thus. He raised his eyes, which are generally bent on the ground, and flashed a look from them that quite abashed me; my dear, he certainly has the most beautiful eyes imaginable. I asked him if I had offended him in any way, and he said to me in his grand, rolling Spanish:

"I am here only to teach you Spanish."

I blushed and felt quite snubbed. I was on the point of making some pert answer, when I remembered what our dear mother in God used to say to us, and I replied instead:

"It would be a kindness to tell me if you have anything to complain of."

A tremor passed through him, the blood rose in his olive cheeks; he replied in a voice of some emotion:

"Religion must have taught you, better than I can, to respect the unhappy. Had I been a don in Spain, and lost everything in the triumph of Ferdinand VII., your witticism would be unkind; but if I am only a poor teacher of languages, is it not a heartless satire? Neither is worthy of a young lady of rank."

I took his hand, saying:

"In the name of religion also, I beg you to pardon me."

He bowed, opened my Don Quixote, and sat down.

This little incident disturbed me more than the harvest of compliments, gazing and pretty speeches on my most successful evening. During the lesson I watched him attentively, which I could do the more safely, as he never looks at me.

As the result of my observations, I made out that the tutor, whom we took to be forty, is a young man, some years under thirty. My governess, to whom I had handed him over, remarked on the beauty of his black hair and of his pearly teeth. As to his eyes, they are velvet and fire; but he is plain and insignificant. Though the Spaniards have been described as not a cleanly people, this man is most carefully got up, and his hands are whiter than his face. He stoops a little, and has an extremely large, oddly-shaped head. His ugliness, which, however, has a dash of piquancy, is aggravated by smallpox marks which seam his face. His forehead is very prominent, and the shaggy eyebrows meet, giving a repellent air of harshness. There is a frowning, plaintive look on his face, reminding one of a sickly child, which owes its life to superhuman care, as Sister Marthe did. As my father observed, his features are a shrunken reproduction of those of Cardinal Ximenes. The natural dignity of our tutor's manners seems to disconcert the dear Duke, who doesn't like him, and is never at ease with him; he can't bear to come in contact with superiority of any kind.

As soon as my father knows enough Spanish, we start for Madrid. When Henarez returned, two days after the reproof he had given me, I remarked by way of showing my gratitude:

"I have no doubt that you left Spain in consequence of political events. If my father is sent there, as seems to be expected, we shall be in a position to help you, and might be able to obtain your pardon, in case you are under sentence."

"It is impossible for any one to help me," he replied.

"But," I said, "is that because you refuse to accept any help, or because the thing itself is impossible?"

"Both," he said, with a bow, and in a tone which forbade continuing the subject.

My father's blood chafed in my veins. I was offended by this haughty demeanor, and promptly dropped Senor Henarez.

All the same, my dear, there is something fine in this rejection of any aid. "He would not accept even our friendship," I reflected, whilst conjugating a verb. Suddenly I stopped short and told him what was in my mind, but in Spanish. Henarez replied very politely that equality of sentiment was necessary between friends, which did not exist in this case, and therefore it was useless to consider the question.

"Do you mean equality in the amount of feeling on either side, or equality in rank?" I persisted, determined to shake him out of this provoking gravity.

He raised once more those awe-inspiring eyes, and mine fell before them. Dear, this man is a hopeless enigma. He seemed to ask whether my words meant love; and the mixture of joy, pride, and agonized doubt in his glance went to my heart. It was plain that advances, which would be taken for what they were worth in France, might land me in difficulties with a Spaniard, and I drew back into my shell, feeling not a little foolish.

The lesson over, he bowed, and his eyes were eloquent of the humble prayer: "Don't trifle with a poor wretch."

This sudden contrast to his usual grave and dignified manner made a great impression on me. It seems horrible to think and to say, but I can't help believing that there are treasures of affection in that man.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
All is over, my child, and it is Mme. de l'Estorade who writes to you. But between us there is no change; it is only a girl the less.

Don't be troubled; I did not give my consent recklessly or without thought. My life is henceforth mapped out, and the freedom from uncertainty suits my mind and disposition. A great moral power has intervened and swept chance from my life. We have property to develop, our home to beautify; for me there is a household to direct and sweeten and a husband to reconcile to life. In all probability I shall have a family to look after, children to educate.

What would you have? Everyday life cannot be cast in heroic mould. No doubt there seems, at first sight, no room left in this scheme of life for that longing after the infinite which expands the mind and soul. But what prevents me from launching on that boundless sea our familiar craft? Nor must you suppose that the humble duties to which I dedicate myself give no scope for passion. To restore faith in happiness to an unfortunate, who has been the sport of adverse circumstances, is a noble work, and one which may suffice to relieve the monotony of my existence. I can see no opening left for suffering, and I see a great deal of good to be done. I need not hide from you that the love I have for Louis de l'Estorade is not of the kind that makes the heart throb at a step or thrill at a glance; but, on the other hand, there is nothing in him which offends me.

What am I to do, you will ask, with that instinct for all that is great and noble, with those mental energies which made the link between us, and which we still possess? This thought has troubled me. But are these faculties less ours because we keep them concealed, using them in secret for the family's welfare, as instruments to produce the happiness of those confided to our care, to whom we owe ourselves without reserve? The time during which a woman can look for admiration is short; it will soon be past. If my life has not been a great one, it will have been calm, tranquil, free from shocks.

Nature has favored our sex in giving us a choice between love and motherhood. I have made mine. My children shall be my gods, and this spot of earth my Eldorado.

I can say no more to-day. Thank you for all you have sent me. Look at my needs on the enclosed list. I am determined to live in an atmosphere of refinement and luxury, taking from provincial life only what makes its charm. In solitude a woman can never be vulgarized—she remains herself. I count greatly on your kindness for keeping me up to the fashion. My father-in-law is so delighted that he can refuse me nothing, and turns his house upside down. We are bringing workpeople from Paris and renovating everything.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
X. MLLE. DE CHAULIEU TO MME. DE L'ESTORADE January.

Oh! Renée, you have distressed me for days! That bewitching body, proud features, natural grace, a soul full of gifts, eyes where the soul may slake its thirst, a heart of delicate feeling, breadth of mind, rare powers—treasures that should give unique satisfaction, hours of poetry to outweigh years, joys to make a life serve for one gracious gesture—all this to be buried in the tedium of a tame, commonplace marriage, to vanish in the emptiness of an existence you will come to loathe! I hate your children before they are born. They will be monsters!

So you know all that lies before you; you have nothing left to hope, fear, or suffer? And supposing the glorious morning rises which will bring you face to face with the man destined to rouse you from the sleep into which you are plunging!... Ah! a cold shiver goes through me at the thought!

Well, at least you have a friend. You will be guardian angel of your valley. You will grow familiar with its beauties, live with it in all its aspects; the slow growth of vegetation, compared with the lightning rapidity of thought, will become part of you; and, as your eye rests on laughing flowers, you will question your own heart. When you walk between your husband, silent and contented, and your children screaming behind, I can tell what you will write. Your misty valley, your hills, your meadow with its little runlets, the effects of atmosphere—this whole world of infinity which laps you round, made so various by God, will recall to you the infinite sameness of your soul's life. But I shall be there, Renée, and in me you will find a heart which no social pettiness shall corrupt, a heart all your own.

Monday.

My dear, my Spaniard is adorably melancholy; there is something calm, severe, manly, and mysterious about him which interests me deeply. His unvarying solemnity and the silence which envelops him act like an irritant on the mind. His mute dignity is worthy of a fallen king. Griffith and I puzzle over him as though he were a riddle.

How odd! A language-master captivates me as no other man has. Yet I have reviewed all the young men of family, attaches, ambassadors, generals, peers, the court, and town. The coldness of the man provokes me. The sandy waste he tries to place between us is covered by his deep-rooted pride; he wraps himself in mystery. The hanging back is his, the boldness mine. This odd situation amuses me because it is trifling. What is a man, a Spaniard, a teacher of languages to me? I make no account of any man, were he a king. We are worth more than the greatest of them. What a slave I would have made of Napoleon! If he had loved me, shouldn't he have felt the whip!

Yesterday I aimed a shaft at M. Henarez which must have touched him. He made no reply; the lesson was over, and he bowed with a glance at me, in which I read that he would never return. This suits me; there would be something ominous in starting an imitation Nouvelle Héloïse. I have been reading Rousseau, which left me with a strong distaste for love; passion that can argue and moralize seems detestable.

Clarissa is too pleased with herself and her long letter; Richardson's work, my father says, is an admirable picture of English women. Rousseau's seems a kind of philosophical sermon cast in letters.

Love, as I conceive it, is a purely subjective poem. In all books about it there is nothing at once false and true. So, my pretty one, as you will henceforth be an authority only on conjugal love, it seems my duty—in the interest of our common life—to remain unmarried, and have a grand passion, that we may enlarge our experience.

Tell me every detail of what happens to you, especially in the first few days, with that strange animal called a husband. I promise to do the same if ever I am loved.

Farewell, poor martyred darling.

XI. MME. DE L'ESTORADE TO MLLE. DE CHAULIEU La Crampade.

Your Spaniard and you make me shudder, my darling. Dismiss him. All that you say corresponds with the character of dangerous adventurers who, having nothing to lose, will take any risk. This man cannot be your husband and must not be your lover. I will write more fully about my married life when my heart is less anxious from your last letter.

XII. MLLE. DE CHAULIEU TO MME. DE L'ESTORADE February.

At nine this morning my father was announced. He sat solemn by the fire, looking thoughtful, and pointed to the armchair opposite. I sank into it gravely; he could not refrain from smiling, though it was dashed with melancholy.

"You are quite a match for your grandmother in quick-wittedness," he said.

"Come, father, don't play the courtier," I replied; "you want something."

He rose, agitated, and spoke for half an hour. This conversation ought to be preserved. This is the first time I have seen my father reveal his inner thoughts.

He flattered me, and I was grateful for being understood.

"Armande," he said, "I was mistaken in you; you have agreeably surprised me. I took you for an average girl, ignorant, easily pleased with gewgaws. Your mind is amazingly open; your clear-sightedness extraordinary. You pass for blind while you lay your hand on causes. In short, you are a minister in petticoats, the only person here capable of understanding me. If I have any sacrifice to ask, it is only to you I can turn."

He prefaced a political plea, asking me to take time—six months if necessary—to consider. I was my own mistress; if I declined, he would trouble me no further.

He explained his statesmanly view: France is in a critical position, understood only by the King and a few superior minds. The King is a head without arms; the great nobles, aware of danger, lack authority over those whose cooperation is needful. The men raised by popular election refuse to serve as instruments; many carry on the work of pulling down society. There are two parties—Marius and Sulla. He is for Sulla. The Revolution is still active; it is embedded in law and soil; it fills people's minds. The King has not two years to live and prefers a peaceful deathbed to drastic action.

"My child," he said, "the Revolution has decapitated every head of a family. The family has ceased; we have only individuals. In proclaiming the equal rights of all children, they have killed the family spirit and created the State treasury. This paves the way for weakened authority, the blind force of masses, the decay of art, supremacy of individual interests, and opens the road to a foreign invader.

"We stand between founding the State on family or on individual interest—between democracy and aristocracy, free discussion and obedience, Catholicism and religious indifference. I oppose what is called the people in the people's true interest. It is not feudal rights but the State's existence. A country resting on wealthy families, each defending a common treasure, is strong; one of scattered individuals is weak. Terrible calamities await us if our party fails: penal or fiscal laws; the generous nation will cease to obey noble instincts. Wounds past curing will be fostered. Equality of desire will be taken for equality of strength; discrimination becomes impossible among the masses. A horde will arise, soon to be arrayed against them the peasant proprietors—twenty million acres, insatiable, obstructing progress."

"But," I interrupted, "what can I do? I feel no vocation for playing Joan of Arc or finding a martyr's block."

"You are a little hussy," cried my father. "If I speak sensibly to you, you are full of jokes; when I jest, you talk like an ambassadress."

"Love lives on contrasts," I said, and he laughed till tears stood in his eyes.

He appealed to my reason. "You ought not to have money of your own till your younger brother is provided for; I want to employ your inheritance to buy an estate for him to go with the title."

"But," I said, "you won't interfere with my living in my own fashion if I leave you my fortune?"

"Provided," he replied, "that your view of life does not conflict with family honor, reputation, and glory."

"Come, come," I cried, "what has become of my excellent judgment?"

"There is not in all France a man who would take for wife a daughter of one of our noblest families without a dowry and bestow one on her. If such a husband could be found, it would be among rich parvenus; on this point I belong to the eleventh century."

"And I also," I said. "But why despair? Are there no aged peers?"

"You are an apt scholar, Louise!" he exclaimed, and left me smiling and kissing my hand.

I received your letter and it led me to contemplate the abyss you warn of. A voice within uttered the same warning, so I took precautions. Henarez dares to look at me; his eyes are disquieting. They inspire an unreasoning dread. Such a man ought not to be looked at. He is ugly and fascinating.

For two days I hesitated whether to tell my father to have Henarez sent away. Yet the horrible sensation which comes over me when I see that man has become necessary to me—"Once more, and then I will speak." His voice is sweetly thrilling; his speaking is like la Fodor's singing. His manners are simple, free from affectation. And what teeth!

Just now, as he was leaving, he seemed to divine my interest and made a respectful gesture as though to take my hand and kiss it; then checked himself, terrified at his own boldness. There was the merest suggestion, but I understood and smiled; nothing more pathetic than the frank impulse of an inferior checking itself abashed. My smile emboldened him. He looked blindly for his hat; I handed it with perfect gravity. His eyes were wet. It was a passing moment, yet a world of facts and ideas were in it. We understood each other so well that I held out my hand for him to kiss.

Possibly this was equivalent to telling him that love might bridge the interval. I cannot tell what moved me. His lips, tempered by two big tears, burned me. I lay in my armchair, nerveless, dreamy. I was happy in a way only a poet could express. My condescension now fills me with shame; then it seemed something to be proud of. He had fascinated me; that is my one excuse.

Friday.

This man is really handsome. He talks admirably and has remarkable intellectual power. He is a Bossuet in force and persuasiveness when he explains the mechanism not only of Spanish but of human thought and of all language. His mother tongue seems French. When I expressed surprise, he said he came to France a boy, following the King of Spain to Valençay.

What has passed within this enigmatic being? He is no longer the same. He came dressed simply, as any gentleman for a morning walk, and brought forth all his eloquence and flashing wit. Like a man roused from lethargy, he revealed a new world of thought. He told me the story of a valet who gave his life for a glance from a queen of Spain.

"What could he do but die?" I exclaimed. This delighted him, and he looked at me in a way alarming.

In the evening I went to a ball at the Duchesse de Lenoncourt's. The Prince de Talleyrand was there; I got M. de Vandenesse to ask whether, among the guests at his country-place in 1809, he remembered any Henarez. Vandenesse reported the Prince's reply: Henarez is the Moorish name of the Soria family, said to be descendants of the Abencerrages, converted to Christianity. The old Duke and his two sons were with the King. The eldest, the present Duc de Soria, has just had property, titles, and dignities confiscated by King Ferdinand. The Duke made a huge mistake in consenting to a constitutional ministry with Valdez. Happily he escaped from Cádiz before the arrival of the Duc d'Angoulême, who could not have saved him from the King's wrath.

This gave me food for reflection. I passed the time till my next lesson in suspense.

During the first quarter hour I examined him, debating whether he were duke or commoner. He seemed to read my fancies and take pleasure in thwarting them. At last I broke off the translation and said to him in Spanish: "You are deceiving us. You are no poor middle-class Liberal. You are the Duc de Soria!"

"Mademoiselle," he replied, with a gesture of sorrow, "unhappily, I am not the Duc de Soria."

I felt the despair in that "unhappily." His eyes dropped; he dared not look at me.

"M. de Talleyrand," I said, "in whose house you spent your exile, declares that any one bearing the name Henarez must be the late Duc de Soria or a lackey."

He looked at me with eyes like two burning coals. All he said was: "My father was indeed the servant of the King of Spain."

This reticence provoked me. Since the last lesson I had played a practical joke. I had drawn an ideal portrait of the man I should wish for my lover in a letter I designed to have him translate. I pointed out I had only rendered Spanish into French, not French into Spanish; I begged Griffith to bring me the last letter I had received from a friend—my own writing. I handed him the paper, the snare, and watched him as he read an ideal portrait of the lover I desired: harsh with men, gentle with women; an eagle eye to quell ridicule; pitying smile for those who would jeer at sacred things; a faith simple as a child's yet firm; fresh, original, free from affectation; few fit words, richly stored mind; actions without sordid motives; superior to his age; gentle to women but not prone to fall in love; great hands; an ironic upper lip for the public, heavenly glance reserved for the beloved. If he met the ideal woman, he would recognize and welcome his fortune. He would never wound the tender heart; to her he would be all.

"Will mademoiselle allow me," he said in Spanish, his voice full of agitation, "to keep this writing in memory of her? This is the last lesson I shall have the honor of giving her, and what I have just received may serve me for an abiding rule of life. I left Spain penniless, but to-day I have received from my family a sum sufficient. You will allow me to send some poor Spaniard in my place."

In other words, the play must stop. He rose with marvelous dignity and left me upset by such delicacy in a man of his class. He went downstairs and asked to speak with my father.

At dinner my father said with a smile: "Louise, you have been learning Spanish from an ex-minister and a man condemned to death."

"The Duc de Soria," I said.

"Duke!" replied my father. "No, he is not that any longer; he takes the title Baron de Macumer from a property which still remains to him in Sardinia. He is something of an original, I think."

"Don't brand with that word, which with you implies mockery, a man who is your equal, and who, I believe, has a noble nature."

"Baron de Macumer?" exclaimed my father, laughing.

Pride kept my eyes fixed on the table.

"But," said my mother, "Henarez must have met the Spanish ambassador on the steps?"

"Yes," replied my father, "the ambassador asked if I was conspiring against the King; but he greeted the ex-grandee of Spain with deference, and placed his services at his disposal."

All this happened a fortnight ago, and it is now a fortnight since I have seen the man who loves me—for that he loves me there is no doubt. What is he about? If only I were a fly, mouse, or sparrow! I want to see him alone, unseen, at his house. Only think, a man exists to whom I can say, "Go and die for me!" and he is made so that he would go. Anyhow, there is a man who occupies my thoughts, whose glance pours sunshine into my soul. Is not such a man an enemy to be trampled underfoot? There is a man who has become necessary to me—a man without whom I don't know how to live! You married, and I—in love! Four little months, and those two doves that once soared have fluttered down into real life.

Sunday.

Yesterday, at the Italian Opera, I felt someone looking at me; my eyes were drawn to two wells of fire gleaming like carbuncles in a dim corner of the orchestra. Henarez never moved his eyes from me. The wretch had found the one spot from which he could see me—and there he was. I don't know what he is as a politician, but for love he has genius.

Behold, my fair Renée, where our business now stands, as Corneille has said.

XIII. MME. DE L'ESTORADE TO MLLE. DE CHAULIEU La Crampade, February.

My dear Louise,—I waited before writing; now I know many things which, for your future happiness, I must tell you. The difference between a girl and a married woman is vast; the girl cannot comprehend it.

I chose to marry Louis de l'Estorade rather than return to the convent; so soon as I realized the convent was the only alternative, I submitted, then examined the situation to make the best of it.

Marriage concerns the whole of life; love aims only at pleasure. Marriage will remain when pleasures vanish, and is the source of interests more precious than those of the pair entering the alliance. Might friendship alone be the requisite for a happy marriage—a friendship which would shut its eyes to many human imperfections? There was no obstacle to friendship between Louis and me. Having renounced finding transports of love in marriage, I found a gentle calm. "If debarred from love, why not seek happiness?" I said. "Moreover, I am loved, and the love offered I shall accept. My married life will be no slavery, but a perpetual reign."

A contract of this kind, opposed to the legal one and even to the sacrament, could be concluded only between Louis and me. This difficulty delayed our marriage. I had renounced the convent and would accept much rather than return; yet, having got an inch, one asks for an ell. You and I are of those who would have it all.

I watched Louis and asked, "Has suffering softened or hardened him?" I found him broken by misfortune, regarding himself as a wreck; three fears haunted him: our ages—thirty-seven and seventeen; the loss of youth in him; and my superiority of womanhood over his manhood. Conscious of these drawbacks, he distrusted his power to make me happy and thought he had been chosen as the lesser of two evils.

One evening he suggested I only married him to escape the convent. "I cannot deny it," I replied gravely. It touched me to see two great tears in his eyes. Never had a man so moved me.

"Louis," I went on kindly, "it rests entirely with you whether this marriage of convenience becomes one to which I can give my whole heart. The favor I ask will demand unselfishness nobler than the servitude expected from love. Can you rise to friendship as I understand it?

"Life gives us but one friend, and I wish to be yours. Friendship is the bond between kindred souls, united and yet independent. Let us be friends and comrades to bear life's burden jointly. Leave me absolutely free. I would put no hindrance to your inspiring me with love similar to yours; but I will be yours only as my own free gift. Create in me the wish to give up my freedom, and at once I lay it at your feet.

"Infuse passion into this friendship, if you will, and let love disturb its calm. I will bring my feelings into accord with yours. One thing I beg: spare me the annoyances our strange position might give rise to with others. I am neither whimsical nor prudish; I feel sure I can trust your honor to keep up the outward appearance of wedded life."

Never have I seen a man so happy as Louis at this proposal. The blaze of joy dried his tears.

"Do not fancy," I concluded, "I ask this from eccentricity. It is the desire for your respect which prompts me. If you owed the crown of your love merely to the legal and religious ceremony, what gratitude could you feel to me later for a gift in which my goodwill counted for nothing? If, while indifferent, a child were born, could I feel toward it as toward one born of common love? Passion may not be necessary in marriage, but there should be no repugnance. In country life, ought we not to guard against the evanescent nature of passion? Is it not prudence to make provision beforehand against calamities incident to change of feeling?"

He made me a solemn promise, and I pressed his hand affectionately.

We were married at the end of the week. Secure of my freedom, I threw myself into the petty details of the ceremony and was my natural self. Perhaps I seemed an old bird; a young girl, delighted with the novel situation she had contrived, may pass for strong-minded.

The difficulties of life appeared to me clearly and I sincerely wished to make him happy. In solitude, marriage soon becomes intolerable unless the woman is the presiding spirit. A woman in such a case needs the charm of a mistress with the solid qualities of a wife. To introduce uncertainty into pleasure prolongs illusion and renders lasting those selfish satisfactions which ought to shroud a woman in expectancy, crown her sovereign, and invest her with inexhaustible power. The more mistress of herself she is, the more certainly will the love she creates be fit to weather life's storms.

Above all, I insisted on secrecy in our domestic arrangements. A husband who submits to his wife's yoke is an object of ridicule. A woman's influence ought to be concealed. The charm of all we do lies in its unobtrusiveness. If I have made it my task to raise a drooping courage and restore brightness to gifts I have dimly descried, it must all seem to spring from Louis himself.

Such is my mission, not ignoble, that could well satisfy a woman's ambition. I could glory in this secret filling my life with interest, while it remains concealed from all but God and you.

I am nearly happy now, but should I be so without a friendly heart in which to pour confession? How make a confidant of him? My happiness would wound him; he is sensitive as a woman, like all men who have suffered much.

For three months we remained as before marriage. During this time I studied small personal matters which have more to do with love than is supposed. In spite of my coldness, Louis grew bolder; his nature expanded. I saw in his face youth restored. The refinement I introduced into the house was reflected in his person. Insensibly I became accustomed to his presence and made another self of him. By constant watching I discovered how his mind and countenance harmonize. "The animal we call a husband," to quote you, disappeared, and one balmy evening I discovered a lover, whose words thrilled me, on whose arm I leaned with pleasure. To be open with you, the perfect loyalty he had kept may have piqued me, and I felt a flutter of curiosity. When pride is the only motive for resistance, excuses for capitulation are soon found.

We celebrated our union in secret. Enough that nothing was lacking for satisfaction of the most fastidious sentiment, nor of the unexpectedness which brings in a sense its own sanction. Every witchery played its part.

Yet I stood out for complete independence. I cannot tell you all my reasons. I believe women lose by not concealing their feelings about marriage.

My one supreme joy springs from having brought new life to my husband before I bore him children. Louis has regained youth, strength, spirits. With magic touch I have effaced his sufferings. It is a complete metamorphosis; Louis is attractive now. Feeling sure of my affection, he throws off reserve and displays gifts.

To be the spring of happiness for a man who knows it and adds gratitude to love, ah! this conviction fortifies the soul more than passionate love. The force thus developed brings forth the family, that noble product of womanhood, which I realize now.

My old father has ceased to be a miser. He gives blindly what I wish. Servants are content; the bliss of Louis has let a flood of sunshine into the household. Even the old man has adopted the dress and manners of the day to please me.

We have English horses, a coupe, a barouche, and a tilbury. Our servants' livery is tasteful. We are looked on as spendthrifts. I apply my intellect to managing the household economically and obtaining maximum pleasure for minimum cost.

I have convinced Louis of the necessity of making roads, to earn reputation as a man interested in the welfare of his district. I insist he study much. Soon I hope to see him member of the Council General, through my family's influence and his mother's. I have told him plainly I am ambitious and pleased his father should continue to look after the estate and economy, that he might devote himself to politics. If we had children, I would like them prosperous with State appointments. Under penalty of forfeiting my esteem and affection, he must get chosen deputy at the coming elections; my family would support him, and we should spend winters in Paris. By his ardor I gauge the depth of his affection.

Here is a letter he wrote me from Marseilles:

"MY SWEET RENÉE,—When you gave me permission to love you, I began to believe in happiness; now I see it unfolding. The past is a dim memory, the present radiant. When I am with you, love transports me; I am powerless to express my affection; I worship and admire. Only at a distance do words return. You are supremely beautiful, statuesque and regal, on which time leaves little impression. The certainty of your unchanging beauty gives me joy. The lines of your face express a noble soul and purity beneath vivid coloring. The brilliance of your dark eyes and the sweep of your forehead declare a spirit of elevation, sound and trustworthy. The keynote of your character is its freedom from pettiness. I appreciate the treasure I possess. Your favors will always make my happiness; I know the dignity in our promise to respect each other's liberty. Our impulse alone shall dictate expression. We shall be free even in our fetters. I shall woo you again now that I know the reward you place on victory. You cannot speak, breathe, act, or think without adding to my admiration. There is in you a rare combination of the ideal, the practical, and the bewitching which satisfies judgment, a husband's pride, desire, and hope, extending love beyond life itself. Oh! my loved one, may love remain faithful, and may the future be full of delights by which you have glorified all around me! I long for the day which shall make you a mother, that I may see you content with the fulness of life, bless the love which refreshed my soul and given new vigor to my powers. Yes, I shall be all that you would have me. I shall take a leading part in public life; on you shall fall the rays of a glory owing its existence to the desire of pleasing you."

So much for my pupil, dear! Do you suppose he could have written like this before? A year hence his style will improve. Louis is in his first transport; what I look forward to is continual content which ought to be the fruit of a happy marriage, when a man and woman in perfect trust and knowledge solve the problem of giving variety to the infinite. This is every true wife's task; the answer begins to dawn and I shall not rest till I have it.

You see he fancies himself the chosen of my heart, as though there were no legal bonds. Nevertheless, I have not yet gone beyond that external attraction giving us strength to put up with much. Yet Louis is lovable; his temper is even and he performs acts on which most men would plume themselves. If I do not love him, I shall find no difficulty in being good to him.

So here are my black hair and eyes—whose lashes act, you say, like Venetian blinds—my commanding air, and my person raised to sovereign power! Ten years hence, why should we not both be laughing and gay in Paris, whence I shall carry you off now and again to my beautiful oasis in Provence?

Oh! Louise, don't spoil the splendid future that awaits us both! Don't do the mad things with which you threaten me. My husband is a young man, prematurely old; why don't you marry some young-hearted graybeard in the Chamber of Peers? There lies your vocation.

XIV. THE DUC DE SORIA TO THE BARON DE MACUMER MADRID.

MY DEAR BROTHER,—You did not make me Duc de Soria that my actions should belie the name. How could I tolerate your being a wanderer deprived of comforts? Neither Marie nor I will marry till we hear you have accepted the money Urraca will hand you. These two millions are the fruit of your savings and Marie's.

We have prayed for your happiness. Heaven will send you the love you seek. Marie read your letter with tears and admires you. I consent, for the family. The King justified your expectations. Oh! that I might avenge you by letting him see himself dwarfed by the scorn with which you flung back his toy.

The only thing I have taken for myself is my happiness: I have taken Marie. For this I shall always be beholden to you. There will be in our lives a day as glorious as our wedding—the day when we hear your heart has found its mate. Live for us, and we live for you.

You can write with confidence under cover to the Nuncio via Rome. The French ambassador there will forward; no other way would be safe. Farewell, dear exile, dear despoiled one. Be proud at least of the happiness you have brought us.

XV. LOUISE DE CHAULIEU TO MME. DE L'ESTORADE March.

Ah! my love, marriage is making a philosopher of you! Your face must indeed have been jaundiced when you wrote those terrible views of human life and the duty of women. Do you think to convert me to matrimony by your programme of subterranean labors?

Alas! is this the outcome of our too-instructed dreams? We left Blois innocent, armed with pointed shafts of meditation, and, lo! the weapons of ideal experience have turned against your own breast! If I did not know you for purest and most angelic, I should say your calculations smack of vice. What, my dear, in the interest of your country home, you submit pleasures to periodic thinning as you do your timber! Oh! rather let me perish in the violence of the heart than live in the arid air of your cautious arithmetic!

As girls we were unusually enlightened by study; but philosophy without love, or disguised as sham love, is the most hideous conjugal hypocrisy. I should imagine even the biggest fool might detect the owl of wisdom in your bower of roses—a ghastly phantom to put to flight the most promising of passions. You make your own fate a plaything.

We each develop oddly. A large dose of philosophy to a grain of love is your recipe; a large dose of love to a grain of philosophy is mine. Why, Rousseau's Julie is a mere beginner to you. Woman's virtue, quotha! How you have weighed life! I make fun, and yet perhaps you are right.

In one day you have made a holocaust of your youth and become a miser before your time. Your Louis will be happy, I dare say. If he loves you, he will never find out that, for your family's sake, you act as a courtesan for money; certainly men seem to find happiness so. A keen-sighted husband might remain in love with you, but what gratitude could he feel in the long run for a woman who made duplicity a moral armor, as indispensable as her stays?

Love, dear, is in my eyes the first principle of all virtues, the Infinite in us. It is not arithmetic. I cannot but think you are trying to justify to yourself marrying a man for whom you feel only esteem. You prate of duty; to take necessity as the spring of action is the moral theory of atheism. To follow impulse is the secret law of a woman's heart. You are acting a man's part, and your Louis will have to play the woman!

Your letter plunged me into thought. I see now the convent can never take the place of mother to a girl. I beg you, my grand angel with black eyes, so pure and proud, do not turn from these cries which your letter has torn from me! I take comfort that while I lament, love may be knocking down the scaffolding of reason.

It may be I shall do worse than you without calculation. Passion is an element in life with a logic as pitiless as yours.

Monday.

Last night I sat at the window to look at a clear sky. In the silence I heard breathing and, by the starlight, saw my Spaniard perched like a squirrel in an elm, doubtless admiring my windows.

At first I withdrew trembling; beneath fear I felt delicious joy. I was overpowered but happy. Not one of those clever Frenchmen who aspire to marry me has had the brilliant idea of spending the night in an elm at risk of being carried off by the watch. My Spaniard has been there; he won't give lessons—he wants to receive them—well, he shall have one. If he knew what I had said of his superficial ugliness! It was horrid to fall in love with a handsome man. Is it not avowing that the senses count for three parts out of four in a passion that ought to be supersensual?

Having got over alarm, I craned from the window to see him again—and he was there. By means of a hollow cane he blew me a letter, cunningly rolled in a leaden pellet.

Good Heavens! will he suppose I left the window open on purpose?

To shut it would make myself an accomplice. I returned to the window as though I had heard nothing and said aloud, "Come and look at the stars, Griffith." Griffith slept as only old maids can. The Moor slid down and vanished.

After a quarter-hour I closed the window and unfolded the delicate paper with the touch of a worker among ancient manuscripts. It felt red-hot. "What a horrible power this man has over me!" I said. I held out the paper to the candle to burn it unread. Then thought: "What can he have to say that he writes so secretly?" I burned it, reflecting that, though any other girl would have devoured the letter, it was not fitting that I—Armande-Louise-Marie de Chaulieu—should read it.

The next night at the Opera he was at his post. He could not discover the slightest agitation in me. This was satisfactory, but he looked very sad. Poor man! in Spain it is natural for love to come in at the window!

Between times he came and walked in the passages. I learned this from the chief secretary of the Spanish embassy, who told how, as Duc de Soria, he had given up a rich heiress, Marie Heredia, letting her have the younger son he loved. He allowed himself to be despoiled by the King.

"He would perform this heroism simply," I said.

"You know him then?" was the reply.

My mother smiled.

"What will become of him, for he is condemned to death?" I asked.

"Though dead to Spain, he can live in Sardinia."

"Ah! then Spain is the country of tombs as well as castles?" I said, trying to laugh.

"There is everything in Spain, even Spaniards of the old school."

"The Baron de Macumer obtained a passport, not without difficulty, from the King of Sardinia," the young diplomat added. "He has become a Sardinian subject, and possesses a magnificent estate in the island with full feudal rights. He has a palace at Sassari. If Ferdinand VII. were to die, Macumer would probably go into diplomacy. Though young, he is one of the most distinguished men in Spain."

I scanned the house with my opera-glass and seemed to heed the secretary, but I was wretched at having burnt his letter. In what terms would such a man express love? He does love me. To be adored in secret, to know a man in a house where all great men of Paris gather is devoted to me, unknown to all! Ah! Renée, now I understand Paris, its balls and gaieties. When we love, we must have society, even to sacrifice it to our love. I felt a different, happier creature. My vanity, pride, self-love—all were flattered. Heaven knows what glances I cast at the audience!

"Little rogue!" whispered the Duchess.

Yes, my wily mother had read my hidden joy. Those two words taught me more worldly wisdom than a year of study. We are in March now. There will be no more Italian opera in a month. How will life be possible without that music when one's heart is full of love?

When I got home I determined, in Chaulieu fashion, to watch for a shower of rain. Oh! if men knew the magic a heroic action throws over us! What I had learned drove me into fever. I felt sure he was ready to aim another letter.

I was right. This time I burnt nothing. Here is the first love-letter I received, madame logician:—

"Louise, it is not for your peerless beauty I love you, nor for your gifted mind, noble feeling, charm, nor for your pride—though you blend pride with charity. Louise, I love you because, for the sake of a poor exile, you unbent this loftiness; by a gesture, a glance, you brought consolation to a man so far beneath you that the utmost he could hope for was your pity. You are the one woman whose eyes have shone with tenderer light when bent on me.

"And because you let fall this glance—a mere grain of dust, yet a grace surpassing any bestowed on me when I stood at the summit—I long to tell you how dear you are. Know, then, idol of my heaven, that there is an offshoot of the Saracen race whose life is in your hands, who will receive your orders as a slave, and deem it an honor to execute them. I have given myself to you absolutely and for the joy of giving, for a glance, for a touch you once offered your Spanish master. I am your servitor, Louise; I claim no more.

"No, I dare not think I could ever be loved; perchance my devotion may win toleration. Since that morning when you smiled upon me, I find you in the sunshine of my home, the fragrance of flowers, the balm of air, the pulsing of my blood, the light in my sleep.

"One thought troubled me—your ignorance of this boundless devotion, the trust, the wealth—henceforth mine only as trust—which lay at your disposal; unknown to you, the heart waiting to receive your confidence, yearning to replace all that your life lacks. Take all, Louise, and bestow on me the one life possible—the life of devotion. In placing the yoke on my neck you run no risk; I ask nothing but the joy of knowing myself yours. Needless to say you will never love me; I must love from afar, without hope.

"In my anxiety to know whether you will accept me as your servant, I have contrived a way you may communicate without danger. At the opera this evening, if you carry a bouquet of one red and one white camellia—that will be my answer. Thenceforth, at any moment, ten years hence or to-morrow, whatever you demand shall be done, so far as a man can, by your happy servant,

"FELIPE HENAREZ."

P.S.—Great lords know how to love! What restrained fire! What loyalty! What sincerity! What high soul in low estate! I felt dazed and thought, "What shall I do?"

It is the mark of a great man that he puts to flight all ordinary calculations. He is sublime and touching, childlike and of the race of giants. In a single letter Henarez outstripped volumes from Lovelace or Saint-Preux. Here is true love, no beating about the bush. Love may be or not, but where it is, it reveals itself in immensity.

Here am I, shorn of all little arts! To refuse or accept—an alternative presented, with no middle course. This is no longer Paris; we are in Spain or the East. It is the voice of Abencerrage, the scimitar and horse he offers, prostrate before a Catholic Eve! Shall I accept this last descendant of the Moors? Read his Hispano-Saracenic letter and see how love sweeps aside the Judaic bargains of your philosophy.

Renée, your letter lies heavy on my heart; you have vulgarized life for me. What need have I for finessing? Am I not mistress for all time of this lion whose roar dies out in plaintive and adoring sighs? He must have raged in his lair in the Rue Hillerin-Bertin! I know where he lives; I have his card: F., Baron de Macumer.

He has made it impossible for me to reply. All I can do is fling two camellias in his face. What fiendish arts love possesses—pure, simple love! Here is the most tremendous crisis resolved into two flowers. We clear the fourteen volumes of Clarissa with a bouquet. I writhe like a thread in the fire. To take, or not to take, test him! I will test him.

XVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME March.

I am dressed in white—white camellias in my hair, another in hand. My mother has red camellias; it might not be impossible to take one from her if I wished! I have a strange longing to defer decision to the last moment and make him pay for his red camellia by suspense.

What a vision! Griffith begged me to stop and be admired. The solemn crisis of the evening and the drama of my secret reply have given me color; on each cheek I sport a red camellia laid upon white.

1 A.M.

Everybody admired me, but only one adored. He hung his head as I entered with a white camellia, then turned pale later when I took a red one from my mother's hand. To arrive with two might have been accidental, but this deliberate action was a reply. My confession is fuller than needed.

The opera was Romeo and Juliet. As you don't know the duet, you can't understand the bliss of two neophytes in love listening to this outpouring.

At home I counted the steps on the sidewalk. My heart and head are on fire. What is he doing? Does he think of any but me? Is he truly the devoted slave he painted himself? How be sure? Has it entered his head I might be thanked rather than loved? I am harrowed by casuistry of heroines.

Has he any idea that in affairs of love a woman's trifling acts are the issue of long brooding—victories won only to be lost? How can I order him to write each evening the day's particulars? He is my slave whom I must keep busy. I shall deluge him with work!

Sunday Morning.

At last I got Griffith to write:

"To the Baron de Macumer.

"Mademoiselle de Chaulieu begs Monsieur le Baron to return to her the copy of a letter written to her by a friend, which is in her own handwriting and which you carried away.—Believe me, etc.,

"GRIFFITH."

Griffith delivered it to Rue Hillerin-Bertin; he returned in an envelope with my sweet portrait, stained with tears. He obeyed. It must have been dear to him! Another man might have refused to send it in a letter full of flattery; the Saracen fulfilled his promise. He obeyed. It moves me to tears.

XVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME April 2nd.

Yesterday was splendid. I dressed like a girl to look her best. My father, yielding to entreaties, gave me the prettiest turnout in Paris—two dapple-gray horses and a barouche. I peeped out like a flower under my white-silk sunshade.

As I drove up the Champs-Élysées I saw my Abencerrage approaching on an extraordinarily beautiful horse. They stopped to admire it. He bowed; on a friendly sign he slackened to speak.

"You are not vexed with me for asking for my letter; it was no use to you," I said, then quieter, "You have transcended the ideal... Your horse makes you an object of interest."

"My steward in Sardinia sent it. He is proud; it is of Arab blood," he replied.

This morning Henarez rode an English sorrel, fine but less conspicuous. My light mockery had done its work. He bowed and I slightly inclined my head.

The Duc d'Angoulême has bought Macumer's horse. My slave understood he was deserting simplicity by attracting notice. A man ought to be remarked for what he is, not his horse or belongings. To have too beautiful a horse seems bad taste, like a huge diamond pin. I was delighted to find fault. Perhaps vanity in a poor exile is excusable; I like to see childishness.

Oh! my poor preacher, do my affairs amuse you as much as your philosophy gives me the creeps? Dear Philip the Second in petticoats, are you comfortable in my barouche? Do you see those velvet eyes, humble, eloquent, flashing on me as some one passes? He is a hero, Renée, and wears my livery—always a red camellia in his buttonhole while I have a white in my hand.

How clear everything becomes in love's light! I know Paris now; it is transfused with meaning. Love here is lovelier and grander than elsewhere.

I am convinced now I could never flirt with a fool. Only men of real distinction can enter our feelings and feel our influence. Oh! my dear friend, forgive me. I forgot our l'Estorade. But didn't you say you were to make a genius of him? I know what that means. You will dry-nurse him till he understands you.

Good-bye. I am a little off my head and must stop.

XVIII. MME. DE L'ESTORADE TO LOUISE DE CHAULIEU April.

My angel—or my imp of evil?—you have, without meaning it, grieved me. I would say wounded were we not one soul. It is plain you have never realized the force of the word indissoluble as applied to the contract binding man and woman. I do not wish to controvert philosophers or legislators, but in making marriage irrevocable they have rendered each union distinct as individuals. Each has inner laws different from others. Laws regulating married life in the country cannot be the same as those in town; nor must character be ignored. The wife of one born to lead may resign to his guidance; the wife of a fool must take the reins.

You speak of vice; reason and reflection may produce what we call vice. Passion is vicious when it reasons, admirable only when it springs from the heart and spends itself in sublime impulses that set at naught selfish considerations. Sooner or later you too will find dissimulation the necessary armor of a woman—if dissimulation mean the courage to bear in silence and prudence to foresee the future.

Every married woman learns social laws which often conflict with nature. Marrying at our age could mean a dozen children—another name for a dozen crimes and misfortunes; it would hand over innocents to poverty; whereas two children would be the happiness of both. The natural law and the code are in hostility; we are the battleground. Would you call prudence in a wife—who guards her family from destruction through calculation—vice? One calculation or a thousand, what matter, if the decision no longer rests with the heart?

You will be guilty of this calculation when proud and happy wife of the man who adores you; or, being sensible, he will spare you by making it himself. (You see, dreamer, that I have studied the code in its bearings on conjugal relations.) When that day comes, we shall meet in Paris and I believe you will say I was mistaken, that M. de l'Estorade is a man of natural gifts.

As for brave love—tremors, night watches by starlight, idolatry—I knew it was not for me. Enlarge the borders of your brilliant life; mine is hemmed to La Crampade.

You reproach me for jealous care to nurse a modest shoot into lasting happiness! I believed I had found how to adapt the charm of a mistress to the position of a wife, and you have almost made me blush. Who shall say which of us is right? Perhaps both. Perhaps society exacts this heavy price for our furbelows, titles, and children.

I too have red camellias, but they bloom on my lips in smiles for my double charge—the father and son—whose slave and mistress I am. But your last letters made me feel what I have lost. You taught me all a woman sacrifices in marrying. One look at those wild plateaus where you range and I wept. Regret is not remorse, though akin.

"Marriage has made you a philosopher!" Bitterly did I feel how far this was from truth, as I wept to think of you swept away on love's torrent. My father made me read Bonald; he revealed the Family in its strength. According to him, your father was right.

Farewell, my dear fancy, my friend, my wild other self.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Well, my Renée, you are a love of a woman, and I quite agree now that we can only be virtuous by cheating. Will that satisfy you? Moreover, the man who loves us is our property; we can make a fool or a genius of him as we please; though the former happens more often. You will make yours a genius, and you won't tell the secret—there are two heroic actions, if you will!

Ah! if there were no future life, how nicely you would be sold: this is martyrdom you plunge into of your own accord. You want to make him ambitious and to keep him in love! Child, the last alone is sufficient.

Tell me, to what point is calculation a virtue, or virtue calculation? You won't say? Well, we won't quarrel—Bonald can decide. We are, and intend to remain, virtuous; nevertheless at this moment I believe you, with all your pretty little knavery, are a better woman than I am.

Yes, I am deceitful. I love Felipe, and I conceal it from him with an odious hypocrisy. I long to see him leap from his tree to the top of the wall, and from the wall to my balcony—and if he did, how I should wither him with my scorn! You see, I am frank enough with you.

What restrains me? What mysterious power prevents me from telling Felipe, dear fellow, how supremely happy he has made me by the outpouring of his love—so pure, so absolute, so boundless, so unobtrusive, and so overflowing?

Mme. de Mirbel is painting my portrait, and I intend to give it to him, my dear. What surprises me more every day is the animation which love puts into life. How full of interest is every hour, every action, every trifle! What amazing confusion between past, future, and present! One lives in three tenses at once. Is it still so after the heights of happiness are reached? Oh, tell me, I implore you, what is happiness? Does it soothe, or does it excite? I am horribly restless; I seem to have lost all my bearings; a force in my heart drags me to him, spite of reason and propriety. There is this gain, that I am better able to enter into your feelings.

Felipe's happiness consists in feeling himself mine; the aloofness of his love, his strict obedience, irritate me, just as his profound respect provoked me when he was only my Spanish master. I am tempted to cry out to him as he passes, "Fool, if you love me so much as a picture, what will it be when you know the real me?"

Oh, Renée, you burn my letters, don't you? I will burn yours. If other eyes than ours were to read these thoughts which pass from heart to heart, I should send Felipe to put them out, and perhaps to kill the owners, by way of additional security.

Monday.

Oh, Renée, how is it possible to fathom the heart of man? My father ought to introduce me to M. Bonald, since he is so learned; I would ask him. I envy the privilege of God, who can read the undercurrents of the heart.

Does he still worship? That is the whole question.

If ever, in gesture, glance, or tone, I were to detect the slightest falling off in the respect he used to show me in the days when he was my instructor in Spanish, I feel that I should have strength to put the whole thing from me. "Why these fine words, these grand resolutions?" you will say. Dear, I will tell you.

My fascinating father, who treats me with the devotion of an Italian cavalier servente for his lady, had my portrait painted, as I told you, by Mme. de Mirbel. I had a copy made, good enough for the Duke, and sent the original to Felipe, with these lines:

  "Don Felipe, your single-hearted devotion is met by a blind
  confidence. Time will show whether this is not to treat a man as
  more than human."

It was a big reward. It looked like a promise and—dreadful to say—a challenge; and worse—I intended it to suggest both without actually committing myself. If in his reply there is "Dear Louise!" or even "Louise," he is done for!

Tuesday.

No, he is not done for. The constitutional minister is perfect as a lover. Here is his letter:—

  "Every moment passed away from your sight has been filled by me
  with ideal pictures of you, my eyes closed to the outside world
  and fixed in meditation on your image, which used to obey the
  summons too slowly in that dim palace of dreams, glorified by your
  presence. Henceforth my gaze will rest upon this wondrous ivory—
  this talisman, might I not say?—since your blue eyes sparkle with
  life as I look, and paint passes into flesh and blood. If I have
  delayed writing, it is because I could not tear myself away from
  your presence, which wrung from me all that I was bound to keep
  most secret.

  "Yes, closeted with you all last night and to-day, I have, for the
  first time in my life, given myself up to full, complete, and
  boundless happiness. Could you but see yourself where I have
  placed you, between the Virgin and God, you might have some idea
  of the agony in which the night has passed. But I would not offend
  you by speaking of it; for one glance from your eyes, robbed of
  the tender sweetness which is my life, would be full of torture
  for me, and I implore your clemency therefore in advance. Queen of
  my life and of my soul, oh! that you could grant me but one-
  thousandth part of the love I bear you!

  "This was the burden of my prayer; doubt worked havoc in my soul
  as I oscillated between belief and despair, between life and
  death, darkness and light. A criminal whose verdict hangs in the
  balance is not more racked with suspense than I, as I own to my
  temerity. The smile imaged on your lips, to which my eyes turned
  ever and again, and alone able to calm the storm roused by the
  dread of displeasing you. From my birth no one, not even my
  mother, has smiled on me. The beautiful young girl who was
  designed for me rejected my heart and gave hers to my brother.
  Again, in politics all my efforts have been defeated. In the eyes
  of my king I have read only thirst for vengeance; from childhood
  he has been my enemy, and the vote of the Cortes which placed me
  in power was regarded by him as a personal insult.

  "Less than this might breed despondency in the stoutest heart.
  Besides, I have no illusion; I know the gracelessness of my
  person, and am well aware how difficult it is to do justice to the
  heart within so rugged a shell. To be loved had ceased to be more
  than a dream to me when I met you. Thus when I bound myself to
  your service I knew that devotion alone could excuse my passion.

  "But, as I look upon this portrait and listen to your smile that
  whispers of rapture, the rays of a hope which I had sternly
  banished pierced the gloom, like the light of dawn, again to be
  obscured by rising mists of doubt and fear of your displeasure, if
  the morning should break to day. No, it is impossible you should
  love me yet—I feel it; but in time, as you make proof of the
  strength, the constancy, and depth of my affection, you may yield
  me some foothold in your heart. If my daring offends you, tell me
  so without anger, and I will return to my former part. But if you
  consent to try and love me, be merciful and break it gently to one
  who has placed the happiness of his life in the single thought of
  serving you."

My dear, as I read these last words, he seemed to rise before me, pale as the night when the camellias told their story and he knew his offering was accepted. These words, in their humility, were clearly something different from the usual flowery rhetoric of lovers, and a wave of feeling broke over me; it was the breath of happiness.

The weather has been atrocious; impossible to go to the Bois without exciting suspicion. Even my mother, who often braves rain, stays at home alone.

Wednesday evening.

I have just seen him at the Opera, my dear; he is another man. He came to our box, introduced by the Sardinian ambassador.

Having read in my eyes that this audacity was well taken, he seemed awkwardly conscious of his limbs, and addressed the Marquise d'Espard as "mademoiselle." A light far brighter than the chandeliers flashed from his eyes. At last he went out with the air of a man who did not know what he might do next.

"The Baron de Macumer is in love!" exclaimed Mme. de Maufrigneuse.

"Strange, isn't it, for a fallen minister?" replied my mother.

I had presence of mind enough to regard Mmes. de Maufrigneuse and d'Espard and my mother with curiosity, as though they were speaking a foreign language, but inwardly my soul sank in waves of intoxicating joy. There is one word for what I felt: rapture. Such love as Felipe's surely makes him worthy of mine. I am the very breath of his life; my hands hold the thread that guides his thoughts. To be frank, I have a mad longing to see him clear every obstacle and stand before me, asking boldly for my hand. Then I should know whether this storm of love would sink to placid calm at a glance from me.

Ah, my dear, I stopped here, and I am still all in a tremble. As I wrote, I heard a slight noise outside, and rose to see what it was. From my window I could see him coming along the ridge of the wall at the risk of his life. I went to the bedroom window and made him a sign; it was enough: he leaped from the wall—ten feet—and then ran along the road, as far as I could see, to show me he was not hurt. That he should think of my fear at the moment when he must have been stunned by his fall moved me so much that I am still crying; I don't know why. Poor ungainly man! What was he coming for? What had he to say to me?

I dare not write my thoughts, and shall go to bed joyful, thinking of all that we would say if we were together. Farewell, fair silent one. I have not time to scold you for not writing, but it is more than a month since I have heard from you! Does this mean that you are at last happy? Have you lost the "complete independence" you were so proud of, and which to-night has so nearly played me false?
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XX. RENEE DE L'ESTORADE TO LOUISE DE CHAULIEU May.

If love is the life of the world, why do austere philosophers treat it as nothing in marriage? Why should Society force the woman to be sacrificed to the family, introducing discord into marriage? This discord was foreseen; men armed themselves with new powers against us to meet its dangers. Without those, we could have overturned their whole theory, whether by the force of love or by a secret, persistent aversion.

I see in marriage, as it now exists, two opposing forces which the lawgiver tried to reconcile. "When will they be reconciled?" I asked as I read your letter. One such letter can overthrow the fabric the sage of Aveyron constructed, under whose shelter I had cheerfully ensconced myself! The laws were made by old men—any woman can see that—and they have decreed that conjugal love, apart from passion, is not degrading, and that a woman may yield without love, provided the man can legally call her his. In their exclusive concern for the family they have imitated Nature, whose one care is to propagate the species.

Formerly I was a person; now I am a chattel. Many tears have I gulped down, alone and far from everyone. How gladly would I trade them for a consoling smile! Why are our destinies so unequal? Your soul expands in the atmosphere of a lawful passion. For you, virtue will coincide with pleasure. If you encounter pain, it will be of your own free choice. Your duty, if you marry Felipe, will be one with the sweetest indulgence of feeling. Our future is caught up in my question, and I await your answer with restless eagerness.

You love and are adored. Let this noble romance, our old dream, take full possession of your soul. Womanly beauty, refined and spiritualized in you, was created by God to charm and delight. Guard well the secret of your heart, and subject Felipe to our devices for testing a lover's metal. Above all, test your own love, for that is even more important. It is easy to be misled by novelty, passion, and the vision of happiness.

Alone of us two, you remain in maiden independence; I beg you, do not risk marriage without some guarantee. Sometimes, when two are apart from the world, their souls stripped of social disguise, a gesture, a word, a look lights up some dark abyss. You have the courage and strength to tread boldly where others would be lost.

You cannot imagine my anxiety for you. Across all this space I see you; my heart beats with yours. Write and tell me everything. Your letters create an inner life of passion within my homely, peaceful household, like a highroad on a gray day. The only event here is that I play cross-purposes with myself. But that must wait. With dogged obstinacy I swing from despair to hope, yielding and holding back. Perhaps I ask of life more than we have a right to claim. In youth we are so ready to believe the ideal and the real will harmonize!

Seated beneath a rock in my park, I have concluded that love in marriage is a happy accident impossible to base a universal law upon. My Aveyron philosopher is right to see the family as the only possible unit in society and to place woman in subjection to it, as through all ages. The solution of this great question lies in our first child. For this reason I would gladly be a mother, were it only to supply food for the consuming energy of my soul.

Louis' temper remains perfect; his love is active, my tenderness passive. He is happy plucking flowers that bloom for him without troubling about the labor that produced them. Blessed self-absorption! At whatever cost to myself, I fall in with his illusions, as a mother should be ready to spend herself to satisfy a child's fancy. The intensity of his joy blinds him and reflects upon me. The smile or look his content brings to my face is enough. So "my child" is the pet name I give him when we are alone.

I wait for the fruit of these sacrifices, secret between God, myself, and you. On motherhood I have staked enormously; my credit is too large, and I fear I shall never receive full payment. To it I look for employment of my energy, expansion of my heart, and compensation of a world of joys. Pray Heaven I be not deceived! It is a question of all my future and, horrible thought, of my virtue.

XXI. LOUISE DE CHAULIEU TO RENEE DE L'ESTORADE June.

Dear wedded sweetheart,—Your letter came at the very moment I needed courage for a bold step I have been meditating day and night. I feel a strange craving for the unknown, or the forbidden, which reveals a conflict between the laws of society and of nature. I cannot say which is stronger, but I find myself torn.

Plainly, I wanted to speak with Felipe alone, at night, under the lime-trees at the bottom of our garden. This desire suits the girl called "up-to-date" by the Duchess, and approved by my father.

Yet there seems method in this madness. I would recompense Felipe for the long nights he passed under my window and at the same time test him: what would he think of my escapade, how would he comport himself at a critical moment? Let him cast a halo round my folly—let him be my husband in that hour; let him show less of the tremulous respect he shows in the Champs-Élysées—farewell, Don Felipe.

As for society, I run less risk meeting him thus than when I smile to him in Mme. de Maufrigneuse's or the old Marquise de Beauseant's drawing-rooms, where spies surround us; Heaven only knows how people stare at a girl suspected of a weakness for a grotesque like Macumer.

I cannot tell you to what agitation the thought reduces me, nor the time spent planning. I wished you near. What happy hours we should have chattered away, lost in the mazes of uncertainty, enjoying in anticipation all the delights and horrors of a first meeting in the silence of night, under the Chaulieu lime-trees, with moonlight dancing through the leaves! As I sat alone, every nerve tingling, I cried, "Oh! Renée, where are you?" Then your letter came like a match to gunpowder, and my last scruples went by the board.

Through the window I tossed to my bewildered adorer an exact tracing of the key of the little gate at the end of the garden, with this note:

"Your madness must really be put a stop to. If you broke your neck, you would ruin the reputation of the woman you profess to love. Are you worthy of a new proof of regard, and do you deserve that I should talk with you under the limes at the foot of the garden at the hour when the moon throws them into shadow?"

Yesterday at one o'clock, when Griffith was going to bed, I said:

"Take your shawl, dear, and come with me. I want to go to the bottom of the garden without anyone knowing."

She followed without a word. Oh, Renée, what an awful moment when, after a little pause full of delicious thrills, I saw him gliding along like a shadow. When he reached the garden safely I said to Griffith:

"Don't be astonished, but the Baron de Macumer is here, and indeed it is on that account I brought you with me."

No reply from Griffith.

"What would you have with me?" said Felipe, in a tone of such agitation that he seemed beside himself at the slight sound of our dresses in the night.

"I want to say to you what I could not write," I replied.

Griffith withdrew a few steps. The air was heavy with flowers. My head swam with the intoxicating delight of being almost alone with him in the shade of the lime-trees, beyond which the garden shone because the house reflected the moonlight. The contrast seemed an emblem of our clandestine love leading to the publicity of a wedding. Neither of us could at first do more than drink in the ecstasy of the moment, as new and marvelous for him as for me. At last I pointed to the elm-tree and said:

"Although I am not afraid of scandal, you shall not climb that tree again. We have played schoolboy and schoolgirl long enough; let us rise to the height of our destiny. Had that fall killed you, I should have died disgraced..."

Every scrap of color left his face.

"And if you had been found there, suspicion would have attached either to my mother or to me..."

"Forgive me," he murmured.

"If you walk along the boulevard, I shall hear your step; and when I want to see you, I will open my window. But I would not run such a risk unless some emergency arose. Why have you forced me by your rash act to commit another, and one which may lower me in your eyes?"

The tears in his eyes were eloquent.

"What I have done to-night," I said with a smile, "must seem the height of madness..."

After walking in silence, he recovered enough to say:

"You must think me a fool; and indeed the delirium of my joy has robbed me of nerve. But whatever you do is sacred in my eyes from the very fact that it seemed right to you. I honor you as I honor only God. And then, Miss Griffith is here."

"She is here for the sake of the others, not for us," I put in hastily.

He understood at once.

"I know very well," he said with a humble glance, "that whether she is there or not makes no difference. Unseen of men, we are still in the presence of God, and our esteem is not less important than the world's."

"Thank you, Felipe," I said, holding out my hand. "A woman—and I am nothing if not a woman—is on the road to loving the man who understands her. Oh! only on the road," I added, putting a finger to my lips. "Don't let your hopes carry you beyond what I say. My heart will belong only to the man who can read it and know its every turn. Our views, though not identical, must be the same in breadth and elevation. I do not exaggerate my merits; what seem virtues to me may have corresponding defects. I should be heartbroken without them."

"Having first accepted me as your servant, you now permit me to love you," he said, trembling. "My first prayer has been more than answered."

"But," I hastened, "your position seems better than mine. I would not object to change places, and that change lies with you."

"In my turn, I thank you," he replied. "I know the duties of a faithful lover. It is mine to prove I am worthy of you; the trials shall be as long as you choose. If I belie your hopes, you have only—God! that I should say it—to reject me."

"I know that you love me," I answered. "So far," with cruel emphasis, "you stand first in my regard. Otherwise you would not be here."

We walked and talked, and when he recovered he put forth genuine eloquence. It was not passion but a marvelous tenderness, which he compared to the divine love. His thrilling, low voice, like a nightingale, lent charm to exquisite thoughts; words flowed like a torrent—the overflow of the heart.

"No more," I said, "or I shall not be able to tear myself away."

With a gesture I dismissed him.

"You have committed yourself now, mademoiselle," said Griffith.

"In England that might be so, but not in France," I replied with nonchalance. "I intend to make a love match, and am feeling my way—that is all."

You see, dear, as love did not come to me, I had to do as Mahomet did with the mountain.

Friday.

Once more I have seen my slave. He has become very timid, adopting an air of pious devotion that pleases me, for it seems to show he feels my power and fascination in every fibre. Yet nothing in his look or manner can arouse suspicion in those society sibyls of the boundless love I know. Don't suppose, though, that I am carried away, mastered, tamed; on the contrary, the taming and mastering are on my side.

I am quite capable of reason. Oh, to feel again the terror of that fascination in which I was held by the schoolmaster, the plebeian, the man I kept at a distance!

Love is of two kinds—one which commands, and one which obeys. The two are distinct, and the passion each gives rise to differs. To be full of life, perhaps a woman ought to experience both. Can the two passions co-exist? Can the man whom we inspire to love inspire it in us? Will the day come when Felipe is my master? Shall I tremble then, as he trembles now? These questions make me shudder.

He is very blind! In his place I should have thought Mlle. de Chaulieu meeting me under the limes a cold, calculating coquette with starched manners. No, that is not love, it is playing with fire. I am still fond of Felipe, but calm and at ease with him now. No more obstacles! What a terrible thought! It is all ebb-tide within, and I fear to question my heart. His mistake was hiding the ardor of his love; he should have forced my self-control.

In a word, I was naughty, and I have not got the reward such naughtiness brings. No, however sweet the memory of that half-hour beneath the trees, it is nothing like the excitement of the old time with its: "Shall I go? Shall I not go? Shall I write? Shall I not write?"

Is it thus with all our pleasures? Is suspense always better than enjoyment? Hope than fruition? Are the rich in very truth the poor? Have we both perhaps exaggerated feeling by letting imagination roam? Sometimes this thought freezes me. Shall I tell you why? Because I am meditating another visit to the bottom of the garden—without Griffith. How far could I go? Imagination knows no limit, but pleasure does not. Tell me, dear be-furbelowed professor, how can one reconcile the two goals of a woman's existence?
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
I am not pleased with you. If you did not cry over Racine's Berenice, and feel it the most terrible of tragedies, there is no kinship between our souls; we shall never get on together, and had better break off now. Forget me; if I do not receive a satisfactory reply, I shall forget you. You will become M. le Baron de Macumer to me, or rather you will cease to be at all.

Yesterday at Mme. d'Espard's you wore a self-satisfied air that disgusted me. No doubt about your conquest! Your self-possession alarms me. Not a trace remains of the humble slave of your first letter. Far from betraying the absent-mindedness of a lover, you polished epigrams. This is not the attitude of a true believer, always prostrate before his divinity.

If you do not regard me as the very breath of your life, nobler than other women and to be judged by different standards, then I am less than a woman in your sight. You have roused in me a spirit of mistrust, Felipe, and its angry mutterings have drowned the accents of tenderness. Looking back on what has passed between us, I feel I have a right to be suspicious. Know, Prime Minister of all the Spains, that I have reflected much on the defenseless condition of our sex. My innocence has held a torch; my fingers are not burnt. Let me repeat what my youthful experience taught me.

In other matters duplicity, faithlessness, and broken pledges are punished; but not so with love, which is at once victim, accuser, counsel, judge, and executioner. The cruellest treachery, the most heartless crimes, remain forever concealed, with only two hearts as witnesses. How should the victim proclaim them without injury to herself? Love, therefore, has its own code, its own penal system, which the world ignores.

For my part, I have resolved never to pardon a serious misdemeanor; in love, pray, what is not serious? Yesterday you looked every inch a man successful in his suit. You would be right to feel assurance; yet if that assurance robs you of the charming simplicity which sprang from uncertainty, I shall blame you severely. I would have you neither bashful nor self-complacent; I would not have you tremble at losing my affection—that would be an insult—nor wear your love lightly as a thing of course. Never should your heart be freer than mine. If you know nothing of the torture that a single stab of doubt brings to the soul, tremble lest I teach you!

In a single glance I confided my heart to you, and you read its meaning. The purest feelings that ever took root in a young girl's breast are yours. The thought and meditation I told you of served to enrich the mind; but if the wounded heart turns to the brain for counsel, be sure the young girl would show kinship with the demon of knowledge and daring.

I swear to you, Felipe, if you love me as I believe and if I suspect the least falling-off in the fear, obedience, and respect you have hitherto professed—if the pure flame that first kindled my heart should ever burn less vividly—fear no reproaches. I would not weary you with letters that betray weakness, pride, or anger, nor even with warnings like this. But if I spoke no words, my face would tell you death was near. Yet I should not die till I had branded you with infamy and sown eternal sorrow in your heart; you would see the girl you loved dishonored and lost in this world, and know her doomed to everlasting suffering in the next.

Do not, therefore, I implore you, give me cause to envy the old, happy Louise—your object of pure worship—whose heart expanded in the sunshine of happiness, since, in Dante's words, she possessed, Senza brama, sicura ricchezza! I have searched the Inferno to find the most terrible punishment to which I might link the vengeance of God.

Yesterday, as I watched you, doubt pierced me like a sharp, cold dagger. Do you know what that means? I mistrusted you, and the pang was so terrible I could not endure it longer. If my service is too hard, leave it; I would not keep you. Do I need proof of your cleverness? Keep the flowers of your wit for me. Show others no fine surface to call forth flattery, compliments, or praise. Come to me laden with hatred or scorn, the butt of calumny; come to me with the news that women flout you and ignore you, and that not one loves you; then, ah! then you will know the treasures of Louise's heart and love.

We are only rich when our wealth is buried so deep that all the world might trample it under foot unknowing. If you had been handsome, I doubt I should have looked twice or discovered one of the thousand reasons out of which my love sprang. True, we know no more of these reasons than we know why the sun makes flowers bloom and fruit ripen. Yet I could tell you one reason very dear to me.

The character, expression, and individuality that ennoble your face are a sealed book to all but me. Mine is the power that transforms you into the most lovable of men; that is why I would keep your mental gifts for myself. To others they should be as meaningless as your eyes, the charm of your mouth and features. Let it be mine alone to kindle the beacon of your intelligence, as I bring the lovelight into your eyes. I would have you the Spanish grandee of old days—cold, ungracious, haughty, a monument to be gazed at from afar, like the ruins of some barbaric power that no one ventures to explore. Now you busy yourself opening pleasant promenades for the public, exhibiting a Parisian affability!

Is my ideal portrait forgotten? Your excessive cheerfulness betrayed your love. Had it not been for a restraining glance from me, you would have proclaimed to the sharpest, keenest, and most unsparing of Paris salons that your inspiration was drawn from Armande-Louise-Marie de Chaulieu.

I believe too much in your greatness to think for a moment that your love is governed by policy; but if you fail to show a childlike simplicity with me, I shall only pity you. Despite this first fault, you remain deeply admired by LOUISE DE CHAULIEU.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XXIII. FELIPE TO LOUISE

When God beholds our faults, He sees also our repentance. Yes, my
beloved mistress, you are right. I felt that I had displeased you, but
knew not how. Now that you have explained the cause of your trouble, I
find in it fresh motive to adore you. Like the God of Israel, you are
a jealous deity, and I rejoice to see it. For what is holier and more
precious than jealousy? My fair guardian angel, jealousy is an
ever-wakeful sentinel; it is to love what pain is to the body, the
faithful herald of evil. Be jealous of your servant, Louise, I beg of
you; the harder you strike, the more contrite will he be and kiss the
rod, in all submission, which proves that he is not indifferent to you.

But, alas! dear, if the pains it cost me to vanquish my timidity and
master feelings you thought so feeble were invisible to you, will
Heaven, think you, reward them? I assure you, it needed no slight effort
to show myself to you as I was in the days before I loved. At Madrid I
was considered a good talker, and I wanted you to see for yourself the
few gifts I may possess. If this were vanity, it has been well punished.

Your last glance utterly unnerved me. Never had I so quailed, even when
the army of France was at the gates of Cadiz and I read peril for my
life in the dissembling words of my royal master. Vainly I tried to
discover the cause of your displeasure, and the lack of sympathy between
us which this fact disclosed was terrible to me. For in truth I have no
wish but to act by your will, think your thoughts, see with your eyes,
respond to your joy and suffering, as my body responds to heat and cold.
The crime and the anguish lay for me in the breach of unison in that
common life of feeling which you have made so fair.

"I have vexed her!" I exclaimed over and over again, like one
distraught. My noble, my beautiful Louise, if anything could increase
the fervor of my devotion or confirm my belief in your delicate moral
intuitions, it would be the new light which your words have thrown upon
my own feelings. Much in them, of which my mind was formerly but dimly
conscious, you have now made clear. If this be designed as chastisement,
what can be the sweetness of your rewards?

Louise, for me it was happiness enough to be accepted as your servant.
You have given me the life of which I despaired. No longer do I draw a
useless breath, I have something to spend myself for; my force has an
outlet, if only in suffering for you. Once more I say, as I have said
before, that you will never find me other than I was when first I
offered myself as your lowly bondman. Yes, were you dishonored and lost,
to use your own words, my heart would only cling the more closely to you
for your self-sought misery. It would be my care to staunch your wounds,
and my prayers should importune God with the story of your innocence and
your wrongs.

Did I not tell you that the feelings of my heart for you are not a
lover's only, that I will be to you father, mother, sister, brother--ay,
a whole family--anything or nothing, as you may decree? And is it not
your own wish which has confined within the compass of a lover's feeling
so many varying forms of devotion? Pardon me, then, if at times the
father and brother disappear behind the lover, since you know they are
none the less there, though screened from view. Would that you could
read the feelings of my heart when you appear before me, radiant in your
beauty, the centre of admiring eyes, reclining calmly in your carriage
in the Champs-Elysees, or seated in your box at the Opera! Then would
you know how absolutely free from selfish taint is the pride with which
I hear the praises of your loveliness and grace, praises which warm
my heart even to the strangers who utter them! When by chance you have
raised me to elysium by a friendly greeting, my pride is mingled with
humility, and I depart as though God's blessing rested on me. Nor does
the joy vanish without leaving a long track of light behind. It breaks
on me through the clouds of my cigarette smoke. More than ever do I feel
how every drop of this surging blood throbs for you.

Can you be ignorant how you are loved? After seeing you, I return to
my study, and the glitter of its Saracenic ornaments sinks to nothing
before the brightness of your portrait, when I open the spring that
keeps it locked up from every eye and lose myself in endless musings or
link my happiness to verse. From the heights of heaven I look down
upon the course of a life such as my hopes dare to picture it! Have you
never, in the silence of the night, or through the roar of the town,
heard the whisper of a voice in your sweet, dainty ear? Does no one of
the thousand prayers that I speed to you reach home?

By dint of silent contemplation of your pictured face, I have succeeded
in deciphering the expression of every feature and tracing its
connection with some grace of the spirit, and then I pen a sonnet to
you in Spanish on the harmony of the twofold beauty in which nature
has clothed you. These sonnets you will never see, for my poetry is too
unworthy of its theme, I dare not send it to you. Not a moment passes
without thoughts of you, for my whole being is bound up in you, and if
you ceased to be its animating principle, every part would ache.

Now, Louise, can you realize the torture to me of knowing that I had
displeased you, while entirely ignorant of the cause? The ideal double
life which seemed so fair was cut short. My heart turned to ice within
me as, hopeless of any other explanation, I concluded that you had
ceased to love me. With heavy heart, and yet not wholly without comfort,
I was falling back upon my old post as servant; then your letter came
and turned all to joy. Oh! might I but listen for ever to such chiding!

Once a child, picking himself up from a tumble, turned to his mother
with the words "Forgive me." Hiding his own hurt, he sought pardon for
the pain he had caused her. Louise, I was that child, and such as I was
then, I am now. Here is the key to my character, which your slave in all
humility places in your hands.

But do not fear, there will be no more stumbling. Keep tight the chain
which binds me to you, so that a touch may communicate your lightest
wish to him who will ever remain your slave, FELIPE.

XXIV. LOUISE DE CHAULIEU TO RENEE DE L'ESTORADE October.

My dear friend,--How is it possible that you, who brought yourself in
two months to marry a broken-down invalid in order to mother him, should
know anything of that terrible shifting drama, enacted in the recesses
of the heart, which we call love--a drama where death lies in a glance
or a light reply?

I had reserved for Felipe one last supreme test which was to be
decisive. I wanted to know whether his love was the love of a Royalist
for his King, who can do no wrong. Why should the loyalty of a Catholic
be less supreme?

He walked with me a whole night under the limes at the bottom of the
garden, and not a shadow of suspicion crossed his soul. Next day
he loved me better, but the feeling was as reverent, as humble, as
regretful as ever; he had not presumed an iota. Oh! he is a very
Spaniard, a very Abencerrage. He scaled my wall to come and kiss the
hand which in the darkness I reached down to him from my balcony. He
might have broken his neck; how many of our young men would do the like?

But all this is nothing; Christians suffer the horrible pangs of
martyrdom in the hope of heaven. The day before yesterday I took aside
the royal ambassador-to-be at the court of Spain, my much respected
father, and said to him with a smile:

"Sir, some of your friends will have it that you are marrying your dear
Armande to the nephew of an ambassador who has been very anxious
for this connection, and has long begged for it. Also, that the
marriage-contract arranges for his nephew to succeed on his death to his
enormous fortune and his title, and bestows on the young couple in the
meantime an income of a hundred thousand livres, on the bride a dowry
of eight hundred thousand francs. Your daughter weeps, but bows to the
unquestioned authority of her honored parent. Some people are unkind
enough to say that, behind her tears, she conceals a worldly and
ambitious soul.

"Now, we are going to the gentleman's box at the Opera to-night, and M.
le Baron de Macumer will visit us there."

"Macumer needs a touch of the spur then," said my father, smiling at me,
as though I were a female ambassador.

"You mistake Clarissa Harlowe for Figaro!" I cried, with a glance of
scorn and mockery. "When you see me with my right hand ungloved,
you will give the lie to this impertinent gossip, and will mark your
displeasure at it."

"I may make my mind easy about your future. You have no more got a
girl's headpiece than Jeanne d'Arc had a woman's heart. You will be
happy, you will love nobody, and will allow yourself to be loved."

This was too much. I burst into laughter.

"What is it, little flirt?" he said.

"I tremble for my country's interests..."

And seeing him look quite blank, I added:

"At Madrid!"

"You have no idea how this little nun has learned, in a year's time, to
make fun of her father," he said to the Duchess.

"Armande makes light of everything," my mother replied, looking me in
the face.

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"Why, you are not even afraid of rheumatism on these damp nights," she
said, with another meaning glance at me.

"Oh!" I answered, "the mornings are so hot!"

The Duchess looked down.

"It's high time she were married," said my father, "and it had better be
before I go."

"If you wish it," I replied demurely.

Two hours later, my mother and I, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and Mme.
d'Espard, were all four blooming like roses in the front of the box. I
had seated myself sideways, giving only a shoulder to the house, so that
I could see everything, myself unseen, in that spacious box which fills
one of the two angles at the back of the hall, between the columns.

Macumer came, stood up, and put his opera-glasses before his eyes so
that he might be able to look at me comfortably.

In the first interval entered the young man whom I call "king of the
profligates." The Comte Henri de Marsay, who has great beauty of an
effeminate kind, entered the box with an epigram in his eyes, a smile
upon his lips, and an air of satisfaction over his whole countenance.
He first greeted my mother, Mme. d'Espard, and the Duchesse de
Maufrigneuse, the Comte d'Esgrignon, and M. de Canalis; then turning to
me, he said:

"I do not know whether I shall be the first to congratulate you on an
event which will make you the object of envy to many."

"Ah! a marriage!" I cried. "Is it left for me, a girl fresh from the
convent, to tell you that predicted marriages never come off."

M. de Marsay bent down, whispering to Macumer, and I was convinced, from
the movement of his lips, that what he said was this:

"Baron, you are perhaps in love with that little coquette, who has used
you for her own ends; but as the question is one not of love, but of
marriage, it is as well for you to know what is going on."

Macumer treated this officious scandal-monger to one of those glances
of his which seem to me so eloquent of noble scorn, and replied to the
effect that he was "not in love with any little coquette." His whole
bearing so delighted me, that directly I caught sight of my father, the
glove was off.

Felipe had not a shadow of fear or doubt. How well did he bear out my
expectations! His faith is only in me, society cannot hurt him with its
lies. Not a muscle of the Arab's face stirred, not a drop of the blue
blood flushed his olive cheek.

The two young counts went out, and I said, laughing, to Macumer:

"M. de Marsay has been treating you to an epigram on me."

"He did more," he replied. "It was an epithalamium."

"You speak Greek to me," I said, rewarding him with a smile and a
certain look which always embarrasses him.

My father meantime was talking to Mme. de Maufrigneuse.

"I should think so!" he exclaimed. "The gossip which gets about is
scandalous. No sooner has a girl come out than everyone is keen to marry
her, and the ridiculous stories that are invented! I shall never force
Armande to marry against her will. I am going to take a turn in the
promenade, otherwise people will be saying that I allowed the rumor to
spread in order to suggest the marriage to the ambassador; and Caesar's
daughter ought to be above suspicion, even more than his wife--if that
were possible."

The Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and Mme. d'Espard shot glances first at
my mother, then at the Baron, brimming over with sly intelligence and
repressed curiosity. With their serpent's cunning they had at last got
an inkling of something going on. Of all mysteries in life, love is the
least mysterious! It exhales from women, I believe, like a perfume, and
she who can conceal it is a very monster! Our eyes prattle even more
than our tongues.

Having enjoyed the delightful sensation of finding Felipe rise to the
occasion, as I had wished, it was only in nature I should hunger for
more. So I made the signal agreed on for telling him that he might come
to my window by the dangerous road you know of. A few hours later I
found him, upright as a statue, glued to the wall, his hand resting on
the balcony of my window, studying the reflections of the light in my
room.

"My dear Felipe," I said, "You have acquitted yourself well to-night;
you behaved exactly as I should have done had I been told that you were
on the point of marrying."

"I thought," he replied, "that you would hardly have told others before
me."

"And what right have you to this privilege?"

"The right of one who is your devoted slave."

"In very truth?"

"I am, and shall ever remain so."

"But suppose this marriage was inevitable; suppose that I had agreed..."

Two flashing glances lit up the moonlight--one directed to me, the other
to the precipice which the wall made for us. He seemed to calculate
whether a fall together would mean death; but the thought merely passed
like lightning over his face and sparkled in his eyes. A power, stronger
than passion, checked the impulse.

"An Arab cannot take back his word," he said in a husky voice. "I am
your slave to do with as you will; my life is not mine to destroy."

The hand on the balcony seemed as though its hold were relaxing. I
placed mine on it as I said:

"Felipe, my beloved, from this moment I am your wife in thought and
will. Go in the morning to ask my father for my hand. He wishes to
retain my fortune; but if you promise to acknowledge receipt of it in
the contract, his consent will no doubt be given. I am no longer Armande
de Chaulieu. Leave me at once; no breath of scandal must touch Louise de
Macumer."

He listened with blanched face and trembling limbs, then, like a flash,
had cleared the ten feet to the ground in safety. It was a moment of
agony, but he waved his hand to me and disappeared.

"I am loved then," I said to myself, "as never woman was before." And I
fell asleep in the calm content of a child, my destiny for ever fixed.

About two o'clock next day my father summoned me to his private room,
where I found the Duchess and Macumer. There was an interchange of
civilities. I replied quite simply that if my father and M. Henarez were
of one mind, I had no reason to oppose their wishes. Thereupon my mother
invited the Baron to dinner; and after dinner, we all four went for
a drive in the Bois de Boulogne, where I had the pleasure of smiling
ironically to M. de Marsay as he passed on horseback and caught sight of
Macumer sitting opposite to us beside my father.

My bewitching Felipe has had his cards reprinted as follows:

HENAREZ

(Baron de Macumer, formerly Duc de Soria.)

Every morning he brings me with his own hands a splendid bouquet, hidden
in which I never fail to find a letter, containing a Spanish sonnet in
my honor, which he has composed during the night.

Not to make this letter inordinately large, I send you as specimens only
the first and last of these sonnets, which I have translated for your
benefit, word for word, and line for line:--

FIRST SONNET

  Many a time I've stood, clad in thin silken vest,
  Drawn sword in hand, with steady pulse,
  Waiting the charge of a raging bull,
  And the thrust of his horn, sharper-pointed than Phoebe's crescent.

  I've scaled, on my lips the lilt of an Andalusian dance,
  The steep redoubt under a rain of fire;
  I've staked my life upon a hazard of the dice
  Careless, as though it were a gold doubloon.

  My hand would seek the ball out of the cannon's mouth,
  But now meseems I grow more timid than a crouching hair,
  Or a child spying some ghost in the curtain's folds.

  For when your sweet eye rests on me,
  Any icy sweat covers my brow, my knees give way,
  I tremble, shrink, my courage gone.

SECOND SONNET

  Last night I fain would sleep to dream of thee,
  But jealous sleep fled my eyelids,
  I sought the balcony and looked towards heaven,
  Always my glance flies upward when I think of thee.

  Strange sight! whose meaning love alone can tell,
  The sky had lost its sapphire hue,
  The stars, dulled diamonds in their golden mount,
  Twinkled no more nor shed their warmth.

  The moon, washed of her silver radiance lily-white,
  Hung mourning over the gloomy plain, for thou hast robbed
  The heavens of all that made them bright.

  The snowy sparkle of the moon is on thy lovely brow,
  Heaven's azure centres in thine eyes,
  Thy lashes fall like starry rays.

What more gracious way of saying to a young girl that she fills your
life? Tell me what you think of this love, which expends itself in
lavishing the treasures alike of the earth and of the soul. Only within
the last ten days have I grasped the meaning of that Spanish gallantry,
so famous in old days.

Ah me! dear, what is going on now at La Crampade? How often do I take
a stroll there, inspecting the growth of our crops! Have you no news
to give of our mulberry trees, our last winter's plantations? Does
everything prosper as you wish? And while the buds are opening on our
shrubs--I will not venture to speak of the bedding-out plants--have they
also blossomed in the bosom of the wife? Does Louis continue his policy
of madrigals? Do you enter into each other's thoughts? I wonder whether
your little runlet of wedding peace is better than the raging torrent of
my love! Has my sweet lady professor taken offence? I cannot believe
it; and if it were so, I should send Felipe off at once, post-haste, to
fling himself at her knees and bring back to me my pardon or her head.
Sweet love, my life here is a splendid success, and I want to know how
it fares with life in Provence. We have just increased our family by the
addition of a Spaniard with the complexion of a Havana cigar, and your
congratulations still tarry.

Seriously, my sweet Renee, I am anxious. I am afraid lest you should be
eating your heart out in silence, for fear of casting a gloom over my
sunshine. Write to me at once, naughty child! and tell me your life in
its every minutest detail; tell me whether you still hold back, whether
your "independence" still stands erect, or has fallen on its knees,
or is sitting down comfortably, which would indeed be serious. Can you
suppose that the incidents of your married life are without interest for
me? I muse at times over all that you have said to me. Often when, at
the Opera, I seem absorbed in watching the pirouetting dancers, I am
saying to myself, "It is half-past nine, perhaps she is in bed. What is
she about? Is she happy? Is she alone with her independence? or has her
independence gone the way of other dead and castoff independences?"

A thousand loves.

XXV. RENEE DE L'ESTORADE TO LOUISE DE CHAULIEU

Saucy girl! Why should I write? What could I say? Whilst your life is
varied by social festivities, as well as by the anguish, the tempers,
and the flowers of love--all of which you describe so graphically, that
I might be watching some first-rate acting at the theatre--mine is as
monotonous and regular as though it were passed in a convent.

We always go to bed at nine and get up with daybreak. Our meals are
served with a maddening punctuality. Nothing ever happens. I have
accustomed myself without much difficulty to this mapping out of the
day, which perhaps is, after all, in the nature of things. Where would
the life of the universe be but for that subjection to fixed laws which,
according to the astronomers, so Louis tells me, rule the spheres! It is
not order of which we weary.

Then I have laid upon myself certain rules of dress, and these occupy
my time in the mornings. I hold it part of my duty as a wife to look as
charming as possible. I feel a certain satisfaction in it, and it causes
lively pleasure to the good old man and to Louis. After lunch, we walk.
When the newspapers arrive, I disappear to look after my household
affairs or to read--for I read a great deal--or to write to you. I
come back to the others an hour before dinner; and after dinner we
play cards, or receive visits, or pay them. Thus my days pass between a
contented old man, who has done with passions, and the man who owes
his happiness to me. Louis' happiness is so radiant that it has at last
warmed my heart.

For women, happiness no doubt cannot consist in the mere satisfaction of
desire. Sometimes, in the evening, when I am not required to take a hand
in the game, and can sink back in my armchair, imagination bears me on
its strong wings into the very heart of your life. Then, its riches, its
changeful tints, its surging passions become my own, and I ask myself to
what end such a stormy preface can lead. May I not swallow up the book
itself? For you, my darling, the illusions of love are possible; for
me, only the facts of homely life remain. Yes, your love seems to me a
dream!

Therefore I find it hard to understand why you are determined to throw
so much romance over it. Your ideal man must have more soul than fire,
more nobility and self-command than passion. You persist in trying to
clothe in living form the dream ideal of a girl on the threshold of
life; you demand sacrifices for the pleasure of rewarding them; you
submit your Felipe to tests in order to ascertain whether desire, hope,
and curiosity are enduring in their nature. But, child, behind all your
fantastic stage scenery rises the altar, where everlasting bonds are
forged. The very morrow of your marriage the graceful structure raised
by your subtle strategy may fall before that terrible reality which
makes of a girl a woman, of a gallant a husband. Remember that there is
not exemption for lovers. For them, as for ordinary folk like Louis and
me, there lurks beneath the wedding rejoicings the great "Perhaps" of
Rabelais.

I do not blame you, though, of course, it was rash, for talking with
Felipe in the garden, or for spending a night with him, you on your
balcony, he on his wall; but you make a plaything of life, and I am
afraid that life may some day turn the tables. I dare not give you the
counsel which my own experience would suggest; but let me repeat once
more from the seclusion of my valley that the viaticum of married life
lies in these words--resignation and self-sacrifice. For, spite of all
your tests, your coyness, and your vigilance, I can see that marriage
will mean to you what it has been to me. The greater the passion,
the steeper the precipice we have hewn for our fall--that is the only
difference.

Oh! what I would give to see the Baron de Macumer and talk with him for
an hour or two! Your happiness lies so near my heart.

XXVI. LOUISE DE MACUMER TO RENEE DE L'ESTORADE March.

As Felipe has carried out, with a truly Saracenic generosity, the wishes
of my father and mother in acknowledging the fortune he has not received
from me, the Duchess has become even more friendly to me than before.
She calls me little sly-boots, little woman of the world, and says I
know how to use my tongue.

"But, dear mamma," I said to her the evening before the contract was
signed, "you attribute to cunning and smartness on my part what is
really the outcome of the truest, simplest, most unselfish, most devoted
love that ever was! I assure you that I am not at all the 'woman of the
world' you do me the honor of believing me to be."

"Come, come, Armande," she said, putting her arm on my neck and drawing
me to her, in order to kiss my forehead, "you did not want to go back
to the convent, you did not want to die an old maid, and, like a fine,
noble-hearted Chaulieu, as you are, you recognized the necessity of
building up your father's family. (The Duke was listening. If you knew,
Renee, what flattery lies for him in these words.) I have watched you
during the whole winter, poking your little nose into all that goes
on, forming very sensible opinions about men and the present state of
society in France. And you have picked out the one Spaniard capable of
giving you the splendid position of a woman who reigns supreme in her
own house. My little girl, you treated him exactly as Tullia treats your
brother."

"What lessons they give in my sister's convent!" exclaimed my father.

A glance at my father cut him short at once; then, turning to the
Duchess, I said:

"Madame, I love my future husband, Felipe de Soria, with all the
strength of my soul. Although this love sprang up without my knowledge,
and though I fought it stoutly when it first made itself felt, I swear
to you that I never gave way to it till I had recognized in the Baron de
Macumer a character worthy of mine, a heart of which the delicacy, the
generosity, the devotion, and the temper are suited to my own."

"But, my dear," she began, interrupting me, "he is as ugly as..."

"As anything you like," I retorted quickly, "but I love his ugliness."

"If you love him, Armande," said my father, "and have the strength to
master your love, you must not risk your happiness. Now, happiness in
marriage depends largely on the first days--"

"Days only?" interrupted my mother. Then, with a glance at my father,
she continued, "You had better leave us, my dear, to have our talk
together."

"You are to be married, dear child," the Duchess then began in a low
voice, "in three days. It becomes my duty, therefore, without silly
whimpering, which would be unfitting our rank in life, to give you the
serious advice which every mother owes to her daughter. You are marrying
a man whom you love, and there is no reason why I should pity you or
myself. I have only known you for a year; and if this period has been
long enough for me to learn to love you, it is hardly sufficient to
justify floods of tears at the idea of losing you. Your mental gifts
are even more remarkable than those of your person; you have gratified
maternal pride, and have shown yourself a sweet and loving daughter. I,
in my turn, can promise you that you will always find a staunch friend
in your mother. You smile? Alas! it too often happens that a mother who
has lived on excellent terms with her daughter, as long as the daughter
is a mere girl, comes to cross purposes with her when they are both
women together.

"It is your happiness which I want, so listen to my words. The love
which you now feel is that of a young girl, and is natural to us all,
for it is woman's destiny to cling to a man. Unhappily, pretty one,
there is but one man in the world for a woman! And sometimes this man,
whom fate has marked out for us, is not the one whom we, mistaking a
passing fancy for love, choose as husband. Strange as what I say may
appear to you, it is worth noting. If we cannot love the man we have
chosen, the fault is not exclusively ours, it lies with both, or
sometimes with circumstances over which we have no control. Yet there is
no reason why the man chosen for us by our family, the man to whom our
fancy has gone out, should not be the man whom we can love. The barriers
which arise later between husband and wife are often due to lack of
perseverance on both sides. The task of transforming a husband into a
lover is not less delicate than that other task of making a husband
of the lover, in which you have just proved yourself marvelously
successful.

"I repeat it, your happiness is my object. Never allow yourself, then,
to forget that the first three months of your married life may work
your misery if you do not submit to the yoke with the same forbearance,
tenderness, and intelligence that you have shown during the days of
courtship. For, my little rogue, you know very well that you have
indulged in all the innocent pleasures of a clandestine love affair. If
the culmination of your love begins with disappointment, dislike, nay,
even with pain, well, come and tell me about it. Don't hope for too much
from marriage at first; it will perhaps give you more discomfort than
joy. The happiness of your life requires at least as patient cherishing
as the early shoots of love.

"To conclude, if by chance you should lose the lover, you will find in
his place the father of your children. In this, my dear child, lies the
whole secret of social life. Sacrifice everything to the man whose name
you bear, the man whose honor and reputation cannot suffer in the least
degree without involving you in frightful consequences. Such sacrifice
is thus not only an absolute duty for women of our rank, it is also
their wisest policy. This, indeed, is the distinctive mark of great
moral principles, that they hold good and are expedient from whatever
aspect they are viewed. But I need say no more to you on this point.

"I fancy you are of a jealous disposition, and, my dear, if you knew
how jealous I am! But you must not be stupid over it. To publish your
jealousy to the world is like playing at politics with your cards upon
the table, and those who let their own game be seen learn nothing
of their opponents'. Whatever happens, we must know how to suffer in
silence."

She added that she intended having some plain talk about me with Macumer
the evening before the wedding.

Raising my mother's beautiful arm, I kissed her hand and dropped on it
a tear, which the tone of real feeling in her voice had brought to my
eyes. In the advice she had given me, I read high principle worthy of
herself and of me, true wisdom, and a tenderness of heart unspoilt by
the narrow code of society. Above all, I saw that she understood my
character. These few simple words summed up the lessons which life and
experience had brought her, perhaps at a heavy price. She was moved, and
said, as she looked at me:

"Dear little girl, you've got a nasty crossing before you. And most
women, in their ignorance or their disenchantment, are as wise as the
Earl of Westmoreland!"

We both laughed; but I must explain the joke. The evening before, a
Russian princess had told us an anecdote of this gentleman. He had
suffered frightfully from sea-sickness in crossing the Channel, and
turned tail when he got near Italy, because he had heard some one speak
of "crossing" the Alps. "Thank you; I've had quite enough crossings
already," he said.

You will understand, Renee, that your gloomy philosophy and my mother's
lecture were calculated to revive the fears which used to disturb us at
Blois. The nearer marriage approached, the more did I need to summon
all my strength, my resolution, and my affection to face this terrible
passage from maidenhood to womanhood. All our conversations came back to
my mind, I re-read your letters and discerned in them a vague undertone
of sadness.

This anxiety had one advantage at least; it helped me to the regulation
expression for a bride as commonly depicted. The consequence was that
on the day of signing the contract everybody said I looked charming and
quite the right thing. This morning, at the Mairie, it was an informal
business, and only the witnesses were present.

I am writing this tail to my letter while they are putting out my
dress for dinner. We shall be married at midnight at the Church of
Sainte-Valere, after a very gay evening. I confess that my fears give me
a martyr-like and modest air to which I have no right, but which will be
admired--why, I cannot conceive. I am delighted to see that poor Felipe
is every whit as timorous as I am; society grates on him, he is like a
bat in a glass shop.

"Thank Heaven, the day won't last for ever!" he whispered to me in all
innocence.

In his bashfulness and timidity he would have liked to have no one
there.

The Sardinian ambassador, when he came to sign the contract, took me
aside in order to present me with a pearl necklace, linked together
by six splendid diamonds--a gift from my sister-in-law, the Duchess de
Soria. Along with the necklace was a sapphire bracelet, on the under
side of which were engraved the words, "_Though unknown, beloved_." Two
charming letters came with these presents, which, however, I could not
accept without consulting Felipe.

"For," I said, "I should not like to see you wearing ornaments that came
from any one but me."

He kissed my hand, quite moved, and replied:

"Wear them for the sake of the inscription, and also for the kind
feeling, which is sincere."

Saturday evening.

Here, then, my poor Renee, are the last words of your girl friend. After
the midnight Mass, we set off for an estate which Felipe, with kind
thought for me, has bought in Nivernais, on the way to Provence. Already
my name is Louise de Macumer, but I leave Paris in a few hours as Louise
de Chaulieu. However I am called, there will never be for you but one
Louise.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
I have not written to you, dear, since our marriage nearly eight months ago. And not a line from you! Madame, you are inexcusable.

To begin with, we set off in a post-chaise for the Castle of Chantepleurs, Macumer's property in Nivernais. It stands on the banks of the Loire, sixty leagues from Paris. Our servants, except my maid, were there before us; after a rapid journey we arrived the next evening. I slept all the way from Paris to beyond Montargis. My lord put his arm round me and pillowed my head on his shoulder, upon an arrangement of handkerchiefs. This was the only liberty he took; the almost motherly tenderness that overcame his drowsiness touched me strangely. I fell asleep then under the fire of his eyes, and awoke to find them still blazing; the passionate gaze remained unchanged, though what thoughts had come and gone meanwhile! Twice he had kissed me on the forehead.

At Briare we had breakfast in the carriage. Then followed a talk like our old talks at Blois, while the same Loire we used to admire called forth our praises, and at half-past seven we entered the noble long avenue of lime-trees, acacias, sycamores, and larches which leads to Chantepleurs. At eight we dined; at ten we were in our bedroom, a charming Gothic room made comfortable with every modern luxury. Felipe, who is thought so ugly, seemed to me quite beautiful in his graceful kindness and the exquisite delicacy of his affection. Of passion, not a trace. All through the journey he might have been an old friend of fifteen years' standing. Later, he has described to me, with all the vivid touches of his first letter, the furious storms that raged within and were not allowed to ruffle the outer surface.

"So far, I have found nothing very terrible in marriage," I said, as I walked to the window and looked out on the glorious moon which lit up a charming park, breathing of heavy scents.

He drew near, put his arm again round me, and said:

"Why fear it? Have I ever yet proved false to my promise in gesture or look? Why should I be false in the future?"

Yet never were words or glances more full of mastery; his voice thrilled every fibre of my heart and roused a sleeping force; his eyes were like the sun in power.

"Oh!" I exclaimed, "what a world of Moorish perfidy in this attitude of perpetual prostration!"

He understood, my dear.

So, my fair sweetheart, if I have let months slip by without writing, you can now divine the cause. I have to recall the girl's strange past in order to explain the woman to myself. Renee, I understand you now. Not to her dearest friend, not to her mother, not, perhaps, even to herself, can a happy bride speak of her happiness. This memory ought to remain absolutely her own, an added rapture—a thing beyond words, too sacred for disclosure!

Is it possible that the name of duty has been given to the delicious frenzy of the heart, to the overwhelming rush of passion? And for what purpose? What malevolent power conceived the idea of crushing a woman's sensitive delicacy and her modesty under the fetters of constraint? What sense of duty can force from her these flowers of the heart, the roses of life, the passionate poetry of her nature, apart from love? To claim feeling as a right! Why, it blooms of itself under the sun of love, and shrivels to death under the cold blast of distaste and aversion! Let love guard his own rights!

Oh! my noble Renee! I understand you now. I bow to your greatness, amazed at the depth and clearness of your insight. Yes, the woman who has not used the marriage ceremony, as I have done, merely to legalize and publish the secret election of her heart, has nothing left but to fly to motherhood. When earth fails, the soul makes for heaven!

One hard truth emerges from all that you have said. Only men who are really great know how to love, and now I understand the reason of this. Man obeys two forces—one sensual, one spiritual. Weak or inferior men mistake the first for the last, whilst great souls know how to clothe the merely natural instinct in all the graces of the spirit. The very strength of this spiritual passion imposes severe self-restraint and inspires them with reverence for women. Clearly, feeling is sensitive in proportion to the calibre of the mental powers generally, and this is why the man of genius alone has something of a woman's delicacy. He understands and divines woman, and the wings of passion on which he raises her are restrained by the timidity of the sensitive spirit. But when the mind, the heart, and the senses all have their share in the rapture which transports us—ah! then there is no falling to earth, rather it is to heaven we soar, alas! for only too brief a visit.

Such, dear soul, is the philosophy of the first three months of my married life. Felipe is angelic. Without figure of speech, he is another self, and I can think aloud with him. His greatness of soul passes my comprehension. Possession only attaches him more closely to me, and he discovers in his happiness new motives for loving me. For him, I am the nobler part of himself. I can foresee that years of wedded life, far from impairing his affection, will only make it more assured, develop fresh possibilities of enjoyment, and bind us in more perfect sympathy. What a delirium of joy!

It is part of my nature that pleasure has an exhilarating effect on me; it leaves sunshine behind, and becomes a part of my inner being. The interval which parts one ecstasy from another is like the short night which marks off our long summer days. The sun which flushed the mountain tops with warmth in setting finds them hardly cold when it rises. What happy chance has given me such a destiny? My mother had roused a host of fears in me; her forecast, which, though free from the alloy of vulgar pettiness, seemed to me redolent of jealousy, has been falsified by the event. Your fears and hers, my own—all have vanished in thin air!

We remained at Chantepleurs seven months and a half, for all the world like a couple of runaway lovers fleeing the parental warmth, while the roses of pleasure crowned our love and embellished our dual solitude. One morning, when I was even happier than usual, I began to muse over my lot, and suddenly Renee and her prosaic marriage flashed into my mind. It seemed to me that now I could grasp the inner meaning in your life. Oh! my sweet, why do we speak a different tongue? Your marriage of convenience and my love match are two worlds, as widely separated as the finite from infinity. You still walk the earth, whilst I range the heavens! Your sphere is human, mine divine! Love crowned me queen, you reign by reason and duty. So lofty are the regions where I soar, that a fall would shiver me to atoms.

But no more of this. I shrink from painting to you the rainbow brightness, the profusion, the exuberant joy of love's springtime, as we know it.

For ten days we have been in Paris, staying in a charming house in the Rue du Bac, prepared for us by the architect to whom Felipe intrusted the decoration of Chantepleurs. I have been listening, in all the full content of an assured and sanctioned love, to that divine music of Rossini's, which used to soothe me when, as a restless girl, I hungered vaguely after experience. They say I am more beautiful, and I have a childish pleasure in hearing myself called "Madame."

Friday morning.

Renee, my fair saint, the happiness of my own life pulls me for ever back to you. I feel that I can be more to you than ever before, you are so dear to me! I have studied your wedded life closely in the light of my own opening chapters; and you seem to me to come out of the scrutiny so great, so noble, so splendid in your goodness, that I here declare myself your inferior and humble admirer, as well as your friend. When I think what marriage has been to me, it seems to me that I should have died, had it turned out otherwise. And you live! Tell me what your heart feeds on! Never again shall I make fun of you. Mockery, my sweet, is the child of ignorance; we jest at what we know nothing of. "Recruits will laugh where the veteran soldier looks grave," was a remark made to me by the Comte de Chaulieu, that poor cavalry officer whose campaigning so far has consisted in marches from Paris to Fontainebleau and back again.

I surmise, too, my dear love, that you have not told me all. There are wounds which you have hidden. You suffer; I am convinced of it. In trying to make out at this distance and from the scraps you tell me the reasons of your conduct, I have weaved together all sorts of romantic theories about you. "She has made a mere experiment in marriage," I thought one evening, "and what is happiness for me had proved only suffering to her. Her sacrifice is barren of reward, and she would not make it greater than need be. The unctuous axioms of social morality are only used to cloak her disappointment." Ah! Renee, the best of happiness is that it needs no dogma and no fine words to pave the way; it speaks for itself, while theory has been piled upon theory to justify the system of women's vassalage and thralldom. If self-denial be so noble, so sublime, what, pray, of my joy, sheltered by the gold-and-white canopy of the church, and witnessed by the hand and seal of the most sour-faced of mayors? Is it a thing out of nature?

For the honor of the law, for her own sake, but most of all to make my happiness complete, I long to see my Renee content. Oh! tell me that you see a dawn of love for this Louis who adores you! Tell me that the solemn, symbolic torch of Hymen has not alone served to lighten your darkness, but that love, the glorious sun of our hearts, pours his rays on you. I come back always, you see, to this midday blaze, which will be my destruction, I fear.

Dear Renee, do you remember how, in your outbursts of girlish devotion, you would say to me, as we sat under the vine-covered arbor of the convent garden, "I love you so, Louise, that if God appeared to me in a vision, I would pray Him that all the sorrows of life might be mine, and all the joy yours. I burn to suffer for you"? Now, darling, the day has come when I take up your prayer, imploring Heaven to grant you a share in my happiness.

I must tell you my idea. I have a shrewd notion that you are hatching ambitious plans under the name of Louis de l'Estorade. Very good; get him elected deputy at the approaching election, for he will be very nearly forty then; and as the Chamber does not meet till six months later, he will have just attained the age necessary to qualify for a seat. You will come to Paris—there, isn't that enough? My father, and the friends I shall have made by that time, will learn to know and admire you; and if your father-in-law will agree to found a family, we will get the title of Comte for Louis. That is something at least! And we shall be together.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
My thrice happy Louise, your letter made me dizzy. For a few moments I held it in my hands, while a tear or two sparkled on it. I was alone beneath the small barren rock where I have had a seat placed; far off, like a lance of steel, the Mediterranean shone. The seat is shaded by aromatic shrubs, and I have had a large jessamine, honeysuckle, and Spanish brooms transplanted there, so that one day the rock will be entirely covered with climbing plants. The wild vine has already taken root there. But winter draws near, and all this greenery is faded like old tapestry. In this spot I am never molested; it is understood that here I wish to be alone. It is named Louise's seat—a proof, is it not, that even in solitude I am not alone here?

If I tell you all these details, to you paltry, and try to describe the vision of green with which my prophetic gaze clothes this bare rock—on whose top some freak of nature has set up a magnificent parasol pine—it is because in all this I have found an emblem to which I cling.

It was while your blessed lot was filling me with joy and—with bitter envy too—that I felt the first movement of my child within, and this mystery of physical life reacted upon the recesses of my soul. This indefinable sensation, which partakes at once of the nature of a warning, a delight, a pain, a promise, and a fulfilment; this joy, mine alone, unshared, has whispered to me that one day this rock shall be a carpet of flowers, resounding to the merry laughter of children, that I shall at last be blessed among women, and from me shall spring forth fountains of life. Now I know what I have lived for! Thus the first certainty of bearing within me another life brought healing to my wounds. A joy that beggars description has crowned for me those long days of sacrifice, in which Louis had already found his.

Sacrifice! I said to myself, how far does it excel passion! What pleasure has roots so deep as one which is not personal but creative? Is not the spirit of Sacrifice a power mightier than any of its results? Is it not that mysterious, tireless divinity, who hides beneath innumerable spheres in an unexplored centre, through which all worlds must pass? Sacrifice, solitary and secret, rich in pleasures only tasted in silence, which none can guess at, and no profane eye has ever seen; Sacrifice, jealous God and tyrant, God of strength and victory, exhaustless spring which, partaking of the very essence of all that exists, cannot be drained below its own level;—Sacrifice, there is the keynote of my life.

For you, Louise, love is but the reflex of Felipe's passion; the life I shed upon my little ones will come back to me in ever-growing fulness. The plenty of your golden harvest will pass; mine, though late, will be but the more enduring, for each hour will see it renewed. Love may be the fairest gem which Society has filched from Nature; but what is motherhood save Nature in her most gladsome mood? A smile has dried my tears. Love makes my Louis happy, but marriage has made me a mother, and who shall say I am not happy also?

With slow steps, then, I returned to my white grange, with the green shutters, to write you these thoughts.

So it is, darling, that the most marvelous, and yet the simplest, process of nature has been going on in me for five months; and yet—in your ear let me whisper it—so far it agitates neither my heart nor my understanding. I see all around me happy; the grandfather-to-be has become a child again, trespassing on the grandchild's place; the father wears a grave and anxious look; they are all most attentive to me, all talk of the joy of being a mother. Alas! I alone remain cold, and I dare not tell you how dead I am to all emotion, though I affect a little in order not to damp the general satisfaction. But with you I may be frank; and I confess that, at my present stage, motherhood is a mere affair of the imagination.

Louis was to the full as much surprised as I. Does not this show how little, unless by his impatient wishes, the father counts for in this matter? Chance, my dear, is the sovereign deity in child-bearing. My doctor, while maintaining that this chance works in harmony with nature, does not deny that children who are the fruit of passionate love are bound to be richly endowed both physically and mentally, and that often the happiness which shone like a radiant star over their birth seems to watch over them through life. It may be, then, Louise, that motherhood reserves joys for you which I shall never know. It may be that the feeling of a mother for the child of a man whom she adores, as you adore Felipe, is different from that with which she regards the offspring of reason, duty, and desperation!

Thoughts such as these, which I bury in my inmost heart, add to the preoccupation only natural to a woman soon to be a mother. And yet, as the family cannot exist without children, I long to speed the moment from which the joys of family, where alone I am to find my life, shall date their beginning. At present I live a life all expectation and mystery, except for a sickening physical discomfort, which no doubt serves to prepare a woman for suffering of a different kind. I watch my symptoms; and in spite of the attentions and thoughtful care with which Louis' anxiety surrounds me, I am conscious of a vague uneasiness, mingled with the nausea, the distaste for food, and abnormal longings common to my condition. If I am to speak candidly, I must confess, at the risk of disgusting you with the whole business, to an incomprehensible craving for rotten fruit. My husband goes to Marseilles to fetch the finest oranges the world produces—from Malta, Portugal, Corsica—and these I don't touch. Then I hurry there myself, sometimes on foot, and in a little back street, running down to the harbor, close to the Town Hall, I find wretched, half-putrid oranges, two for a sou, which I devour eagerly. The bluish, greenish shades on the mouldy parts sparkle like diamonds in my eyes, they are flowers to me; I forget the putrid odor, and find them delicious, with a piquant flavor, and stimulating as wine. My dear, they are the first love of my life! Your passion for Felipe is nothing to this! Sometimes I can slip out secretly and fly to Marseilles, full of passionate longings, which grow more intense as I draw near the street. I tremble lest the woman should be sold out of rotten oranges; I pounce on them and devour them as I stand. It seems to me an ambrosial food, and yet I have seen Louis turn aside, unable to bear the smell. Then came to my mind the ghastly words of Obermann in his gloomy elegy, which I wish I had never read, "Roots slake their thirst in foulest streams." Since I took to this diet, the sickness has ceased, and I feel much stronger. This depravity of taste must have a meaning, for it seems to be part of a natural process and to be common to most women, sometimes going to most extravagant lengths.

When my situation is more marked, I shall not go beyond the grounds, for I should not like to be seen under these circumstances. I have the greatest curiosity to know at what precise moment the sense of motherhood begins. It cannot possibly be in the midst of frightful suffering, the very thought of which makes me shudder.

Farewell, favorite of fortune! Farewell, my friend, in whom I live again, and through whom I am able to picture to myself this brave love, this jealousy all on fire at a look, these whisperings in the ear, these joys which create for women, as it were, a new atmosphere, a new daylight, fresh life! Ah! pet, I too understand love. Don't weary of telling me everything. Keep faithful to our bond. I promise, in my turn, to spare you nothing.

Nay—to conclude in all seriousness—I will not conceal from you that, on reading your letter a second time, I was seized with a dread which I could not shake off. This superb love seems like a challenge to Providence. Will not the sovereign master of this earth, Calamity, take umbrage if no place be left for him at your feast? What mighty edifice of fortune has he not overthrown? Oh! Louise, forget not, in all this happiness, your prayers to God. Do good, be kind and merciful; let your moderation, if it may be, avert disaster. Religion has meant much more to me since I left the convent and since my marriage; but your Paris news contains no mention of it. In your glorification of Felipe it seems to me you reverse the saying, and invoke God less than His saint.

But, after all, this panic is only excess of affection. You go to church together, I do not doubt, and do good in secret. The close of this letter will seem to you very primitive, I expect, but think of the too eager friendship which prompts these fears—a friendship of the type of La Fontaine's, which takes alarms at dreams, at half-formed, misty ideas. You deserve to be happy, since, through it all, you still think of me, no less than I think of you, in my monotonous life, which, though it lacks color, is yet not empty, and, if uneventful, is not unfruitful. God bless you, then!
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Madame,--

It is my wife's wish that you should not learn first from the formal announcement of an event which has filled us with joy. Renée has just given birth to a fine boy, whose baptism we are postponing till your return to Chantepleurs. Renée and I both hope you will then come as far as La Crampade, and consent to act as godmother to our firstborn. In this hope, I have had him placed on the register under the name of Armand-Louis de l'Estorade.

Our dear Renée suffered much, but bore it with patient courage. You who know her will easily understand that the assurance of bringing happiness to us all supported her through this trying apprenticeship to motherhood.

Without resorting to the exaggerations to which the novel sensation of being a father is apt to give rise, I may tell you that little Armand is a beautiful infant; you will believe it when I add that he has Renée's features and eyes, which already show intelligence.

The physician and accoucheur assure us that Renée is now quite out of danger; and as she proves an admirable nurse—Nature has endowed her so generously—my father and I are able to give free rein to our joy. Madame, may I express the hope that this joy, so vivid and intense, which has brought fresh life into our house and changed the face of existence for my dear wife, may ere long be yours?

Renée has had a suite of rooms prepared; I only wish they were worthy of our guests. The cordial reception that awaits you may perhaps atone for any lack of splendor.

I have heard from Renée, madame, of your kind thought in regard to us, and I take this opportunity of thanking you for it, the more gladly because nothing could now be more appropriate. The birth of a grandson has reconciled my father to sacrifices which bear hardly on an old man. He has just bought two estates, and La Crampade is now a property with an annual rental of thirty thousand francs. My father intends asking the King's permission to form an entailed estate of it; and if you are good enough to get for him the title of which you spoke in your last letter, you will have already done much for your godson.

For my part, I shall carry out your suggestions solely with the object of bringing you and Renée together during the sessions of the Chamber. I am working hard with the view of becoming what is called a specialist. But nothing could give me greater encouragement in my labors than the thought that you will take an interest in my little Armand. Come, then, we beg of you; with your beauty and your grace, your playful fancy and your noble soul, enact the part of good fairy to my son and heir. You will thus, madame, add undying gratitude to the respectful regard of

Your very humble, obedient servant, LOUIS DE L'ESTORADE.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XXX. LOUISE DE MACUMER TO RENEE DE L'ESTORADE January 1826.

Macumer has just wakened me, darling, with your husband's letter. First—yes. We shall be going to Chantepleurs about the end of April. To me it will be a piling up of pleasure to travel, to see you, and to be the godmother of your first child. I must, please, have Macumer for godfather. To take part in a ceremony of the Church with another as my partner would be hateful to me. Ah! if you could see the look he gave me as I said this, you would know what store this sweetest of lovers sets on his wife!

"I am the more bent on our visiting La Crampade together, Felipe," I went on, "because I might have a child there. I too, you know, would be a mother!... And yet, can you fancy me torn in two between you and the infant? To begin with, if I saw any creature—were it even my own son—taking my place in your heart, I couldn't answer for the consequences. Medea may have been right after all. The Greeks had some good notions!"

And he laughed.

So, my sweetheart, you have the fruit without the flowers; I the flowers without the fruit. The contrast in our lives still holds good. Between the two of us we have surely enough philosophy to find the moral of it some day. Bah! only ten months married! Too soon, you will admit, to give up hope.

We are leading a gay, yet far from empty life, as is the way with happy people. The days are never long enough for us. Society, seeing me in the trappings of a married woman, pronounces the Baronne de Macumer much prettier than Louise de Chaulieu: a happy love is a most becoming cosmetic. When Felipe and I drive along the Champs-Elysees in the bright sunshine of a crisp January day, beneath the trees, frosted with clusters of white stars, and face all Paris on the spot where last year we met with a gulf between us, the contrast calls up a thousand fancies. Suppose, after all, your last letter should be right in its forecast, and we are too presumptuous!

If I am ignorant of a mother's joys, you shall tell me about them; I will learn by sympathy. But my imagination can picture nothing to equal the rapture of love. You will laugh at my extravagance; but, I assure you, that a dozen times in as many months the longing has seized me to die at thirty, while life was still untarnished, amidst the roses of love, in the embrace of passion. To bid farewell to the feast at its brightest, before disappointment has come, having lived in this sunshine and celestial air, and well-nigh spent myself in love, not a leaf dropped from my crown, not an illusion perished in my heart, what a dream is there! Think what it would be to bear about a young heart in an aged body, to see only cold, dumb faces around me, where even strangers used to smile; to be a worthy matron! Can Hell have a worse torture?

On this very subject, in fact, Felipe and I have had our first quarrel. I contended that he ought to have sufficient moral strength to kill me in my sleep when I have reached thirty, so that I might pass from one dream to another. The wretch declined. I threatened to leave him alone in the world, and, poor child, he turned white as a sheet. My dear, this distinguished statesman is neither more nor less than a baby. It is incredible what youth and simplicity he contrived to hide away. Now that I allow myself to think aloud with him, as I do with you, and have no secrets from him, we are always giving each other surprises.

Dear Renee, Felipe and Louise, the pair of lovers, want to send a present to the young mother. We would like to get something that would give you pleasure, and we don't share the popular taste for surprises; so tell me quite frankly, please, what you would like. It ought to be something which would recall us to you in a pleasant way, something which you will use every day, and which won't wear out with use. The meal which with us is most cheerful and friendly is lunch, and therefore the idea occurred to me of a special luncheon service, ornamented with figures of babies. If you approve of this, let me know at once; for it will have to be ordered immediately if we are to bring it. Paris artists are gentlemen of far too much importance to be hurried. This will be my offering to Lucina.

Farewell, dear nursing mother. May all a mother's delights be yours! I await with impatience your first letter, which will tell me all about it, I hope. Some of the details in your husband's letter went to my heart. Poor Renee, a mother has a heavy price to pay. I will tell my godson how dearly he must love you. No end of love, my sweet one.

XXXI. RENEE DE L'ESTORADE TO LOUISE DE MACUMER

It is nearly five months now since baby was born, and not once, dear heart, have I found a single moment for writing to you. When you are a mother yourself, you will be more ready to excuse me, than you are now; for you have punished me a little bit in making your own letters so few and far between. Do write, my darling! Tell me of your pleasures; lay on the blue as brightly as you please. It will not hurt me, for I am happy now, happier than you can imagine.

I went in state to the parish church to hear the Mass for recovery from childbirth, as is the custom in the old families of Provence. I was supported on either side by the two grandfathers—Louis' father and my own. Never had I knelt before God with such a flood of gratitude in my heart. I have so much to tell you of, so many feelings to describe, that I don't know where to begin; but from amidst these confused memories, one rises distinctly, that of my prayer in the church.

When I found myself transformed into a joyful mother, on the very spot where, as a girl, I had trembled for my future, it seemed to my fancy that the Virgin on the altar bowed her head and pointed to the infant Christ, who smiled at me! My heart full of pure and heavenly love, I held out little Armand for the priest to bless and bathe, in anticipation of the regular baptism to come later. But you will see us together then, Armand and me.

My child—come see how readily the word comes, and indeed there is none sweeter to a mother's heart and mind or on her lips—well, then, dear child, during the last two months I used to drag myself wearily and heavily about the gardens, not realizing yet how precious was the burden, spite of all the discomforts it brought! I was haunted by forebodings so gloomy and ghastly, that they got the better even of curiosity; in vain did I picture the delights of motherhood. My heart made no response even to the thought of the little one, who announced himself by lively kicking. That is a sensation, dear, which may be welcome when it is familiar; but as a novelty, it is more strange than pleasing. I speak for myself at least; you know I would never affect anything I did not really feel, and I look on my child as a gift straight from Heaven. For one who saw in it rather the image of the man she loved, it might be different.

But enough of such sad thoughts, gone, I trust, for ever.

When the crisis came, I summoned all my powers of resistance, and braced myself so well for suffering, that I bore the horrible agony—so they tell me—quite marvelously. For about an hour I sank into a sort of stupor, of the nature of a dream. I seemed to myself then two beings—an outer covering racked and tortured by red-hot pincers, and a soul at peace. In this strange state the pain formed itself into a sort of halo hovering over me. A gigantic rose seemed to spring out of my head and grow ever larger and larger, till it enfolded me in its blood-red petals. The same color dyed the air around, and everything I saw was blood-red. At last the climax came, when soul and body seemed no longer able to hold together; the spasms of pain gripped me like death itself. I screamed aloud, and found fresh strength against this fresh torture. Suddenly this concert of hideous cries was overborne by a joyful sound—the shrill wail of the newborn infant. No words can describe that moment. It was as though the universe took part in my cries, when all at once the chorus of pain fell hushed before the child's feeble note.

They laid me back again in the large bed, and it felt like paradise to me, even in my extreme exhaustion. Three or four happy faces pointed through tears to the child. My dear, I exclaimed in terror:

"It's just like a little monkey! Are you really and truly certain it is a child?"

I fell back on my side, miserably disappointed at my first experience of motherly feeling.

"Don't worry, dear," said my mother, who had installed herself as nurse. "Why, you've got the finest baby in the world. You mustn't excite yourself; but give your whole mind now to turning yourself as much as possible into an animal, a milch cow, pasturing in the meadow."

I fell asleep then, fully resolved to let nature have her way.

Ah! my sweet, how heavenly it was to waken up from all the pain and haziness of the first days, when everything was still dim, uncomfortable, confused. A ray of light pierced the darkness; my heart and soul, my inner self—a self I had never known before—rent the envelope of gloomy suffering, as a flower bursts its sheath at the first warm kiss of the sun, at the moment when the little wretch fastened on my breast and sucked. Not even the sensation of the child's first cry was so exquisite as this. This is the dawn of motherhood, this is the Fiat lux!

Here is happiness, joy ineffable, though it comes not without pangs. Oh! my sweet jealous soul, how you will relish a delight which exists only for ourselves, the child, and God! For this tiny creature all knowledge is summed up in its mother's breast. This is the one bright spot in its world, towards which its puny strength goes forth. Its thoughts cluster round this spring of life, which it leaves only to sleep, and whither it returns on waking. Its lips have a sweetness beyond words, and their pressure is at once a pain and a delight, a delight which by every excess becomes pain, or a pain which culminates in delight. The sensation which rises from it, and which penetrates to the very core of my life, baffles all description. It seems a sort of centre whence a myriad joy-bearing rays gladden the heart and soul. To bear a child is nothing; to nourish it is birth renewed every hour.

Oh! Louise, there is no caress of lover with half the power of those little pink hands, as they stray about, seeking whereby to lay hold on life. And the infant glances, now turned upon the breast, now raised to meet our own! What dreams come to us as we watch the clinging nursling! All our powers, whether of mind or body, are at its service; for it we breathe and think, in it our longings are more than satisfied! The sweet sensation of warmth at the heart, which the sound of his first cry brought to me—like the first ray of sunshine on the earth—came again as I felt the milk flow into his mouth, again as his eyes met mine, and at this moment I have felt it once more as his first smile gave token of a mind working within—for he has laughed, my dear! A laugh, a glance, a bite, a cry—four miracles of gladness which go straight to the heart and strike chords that respond to no other touch. A child is tied to our heart-strings, as the spheres are linked to their creator; we cannot think of God except as a mother's heart writ large.

It is only in the act of nursing that a woman realizes her motherhood in visible and tangible fashion; it is a joy of every moment. The milk becomes flesh before our eyes; it blossoms into the tips of those delicate flower-like fingers; it expands in tender, transparent nails; it spins the silky tresses; it kicks in the little feet. Oh! those baby feet, how plainly they talk to us! In them the child finds its first language.

Yes, Louise, nursing is a miracle of transformation going on before one's bewildered eyes. Those cries, they go to your heart and not your ears; those smiling eyes and lips, those plunging feet, they speak in words which could not be plainer if God traced them before you in letters of fire! What else is there in the world to care about? The father? Why, you could kill him if he dreamed of waking the baby! Just as the child is the world to us, so do we stand alone in the world for the child. The sweet consciousness of a common life is ample recompense for all the trouble and suffering—for suffering there is. Heaven save you, Louise, from ever knowing the maddening agony of a wound which gapes afresh with every pressure of rosy lips, and is so hard to heal—the heaviest tax perhaps imposed on beauty. For know, Louise, and beware! it visits only a fair and delicate skin.

My little ape has in five months developed into the prettiest darling that ever mother bathed in tears of joy, washed, brushed, combed, and made smart; for God knows what unwearied care we lavish upon those tender blossoms! So my monkey has ceased to exist, and behold in his stead a baby, as my English nurse says, a regular pink-and-white baby. He cries very little too now, for he is conscious of the love bestowed on him; indeed, I hardly ever leave him, and I strive to wrap him round in the atmosphere of my love.

Dear, I have a feeling now for Louis which is not love, but which ought to be the crown of a woman's love where it exists. Nay, I am not sure whether this tender fondness, this unselfish gratitude, is not superior to love. From all that you have told me of it, dear pet, I gather that love has something terribly earthly about it, whilst a strain of holy piety purifies the affection a happy mother feels for the author of her far-reaching and enduring joys. A mother's happiness is like a beacon, lighting up the future, but reflected also on the past in the guise of fond memories.

The old l'Estorade and his son have moreover redoubled their devotion to me; I am like a new person to them. Every time they see me and speak to me, it is with a fresh holiday joy, which touches me deeply. The grandfather has, I verily believe, turned child again; he looks at me admiringly, and the first time I came down to lunch he was moved to tears to see me eating and suckling the child. The moisture in these dry old eyes, generally expressive only of avarice, was a wonderful comfort to me. I felt that the good soul entered into my joy.

As for Louis, he would shout aloud to the trees and stones of the highway that he has a son; and he spends whole hours watching your sleeping godson. He does not know, he says, when he will grow used to it. These extravagant expressions of delight show me how great must have been their fears beforehand. Louis has confided in me that he had believed himself condemned to be childless. Poor fellow! he has all at once developed very much, and he works even harder than he did. The father in him has quickened his ambition.

For myself, dear soul, I grow happier and happier every moment. Each hour creates a fresh tie between the mother and her infant. The very nature of my feelings proves to me that they are normal, permanent, and indestructible; whereas I shrewdly suspect love, for instance, of being intermittent. Certainly it is not the same at all moments, the flowers which it weaves into the web of life are not all of equal brightness; love, in short, can and must decline. But a mother's love has no ebb-tide to fear; rather it grows with the growth of the child's needs, and strengthens with its strength. Is it not at once a passion, a natural craving, a feeling, a duty, a necessity, a joy? Yes, darling, here is woman's true sphere. Here the passion for self-sacrifice can expend itself, and no jealousy intrudes.

Here, too, is perhaps the single point on which society and nature are at one. Society, in this matter, enforces the dictates of nature, strengthening the maternal instinct by adding to it family spirit and the desire of perpetuating a name, a race, an estate. How tenderly must not a woman cherish the child who has been the first to open up to her these joys, the first to call forth the energies of her nature and to instruct her in the grand art of motherhood! The right of the eldest, which in the earliest times formed a part of the natural order and was lost in the origins of society, ought never, in my opinion, to have been questioned. Ah! how much a mother learns from her child! The constant protection of a helpless being forces us to so strict an alliance with virtue, that a woman never shows to full advantage except as a mother. Then alone can her character expand in the fulfilment of all life's duties and the enjoyment of all its pleasures. A woman who is not a mother is maimed and incomplete. Hasten, then, my sweetest, to fulfil your mission. Your present happiness will then be multiplied by the wealth of my delights.

23rd.

I had to tear myself from you because your godson was crying. I can hear his cry from the bottom of the garden. But I would not let this go without a word of farewell. I have just been reading over what I have said, and am horrified to see how vulgar are the feelings expressed! What I feel, every mother, alas! since the beginning must have felt, I suppose, in the same way, and put into the same words. You will laugh at me, as we do at the naive father who dilates on the beauty and cleverness of his (of course) quite exceptional offspring. But the refrain of my letter, darling, is this, and I repeat it: I am as happy now as I used to be miserable. This grange—and is it not going to be an estate, a family property?—has become my land of promise. The desert is past and over. A thousand loves, darling pet. Write to me, for now I can read without a tear the tale of your happy love. Farewell.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XXXII. MME. DE MACUMER TO MME. DE L'ESTORADE March 1826.

Do you know, dear, that it is more than three months since I have
written to you or heard from you? I am the more guilty of the two, for I
did not reply to your last, but you don't stand on punctilio, surely?

Macumer and I have taken your silence for consent as regards the
baby-wreathed luncheon service, and the little cherubs are starting this
morning for Marseilles. It took six months to carry out the design.
When Felipe asked me to see the service before it was packed, I woke up
to the fact that we had not interchanged a word since the letter of yours
which gave me an insight into a mother's heart.

My sweet, it is this terrible Paris—there's my excuse. What, pray, is
yours? Oh! what a whirlpool is society! Didn't I tell you once that
in Paris one must be as the Parisians? Society there drives out all
sentiment; it lays an embargo on your time; and unless you are careful,
soon eats away your heart altogether. What an amazing masterpiece is the
character of Célimène in Molière's Le Misanthrope! She is the society
woman, not only of Louis XIV.'s time, but of our own, and of all time.

Where should I be but for my breastplate—the love I bear Felipe? This
very morning I told him, as the outcome of these reflections, that he
was my salvation. If my evenings are a continuous round of parties,
balls, concerts, and theatres, at night my heart expands again, and
is healed of the wounds received in the world by the delights of the
passionate love which await my return.

I dine at home only when we have friends, so-called, with us, and spend
the afternoon there only on my day, for I have a day now—Wednesday—for
receiving. I have entered the lists with Mmes. d'Espard and de
Maufrigneuse, and with the old Duchesse de Lenoncourt, and my house has
the reputation of being a lively one. I allowed myself to become
the fashion, because I saw how much pleasure my success gave Felipe. My
mornings are his; from four in the afternoon till two in the morning I
belong to Paris. Macumer makes an admirable host, witty and dignified,
perfect in courtesy, and with an air of real distinction. No woman could
help loving such a husband even if she had chosen him without consulting
her heart.

My father and mother have left for Madrid. Louis XVIII. being out of the
way, the Duchess had no difficulty in obtaining from our good-natured
Charles X. the appointment of her fascinating poet; so he is carried off
in the capacity of attaché.

My brother, the Duc de Rhetore, deigns to recognize me as a person of
mark. As for my younger brother, The Comte de Chaulieu, this buckram
warrior owes me everlasting gratitude. Before my father left, he spent
my fortune in acquiring for the Count an estate of forty thousand francs
a year, entailed on the title, and his marriage with Mlle. de Mortsauf,
an heiress from Touraine, is definitely arranged. The King, in order to
preserve the name and titles of the de Lenoncourt and de Givry families
from extinction, is to confer these, together with the armorial
bearings, by patent on my brother. Certainly it would never have done
to allow these two fine names and their splendid motto, Faciem semper
monstramus, to perish. Mlle. de Mortsauf, who is granddaughter and
sole heiress of the Duc de Lenoncourt-Givry, will, it is said, inherit
altogether more than one hundred thousand livres a year. The only
stipulation my father has made is that the de Chaulieu arms should
appear in the centre of the de Lenoncourt escutcheon. Thus my brother
will be Duc de Lenoncourt. The young de Mortsauf, to whom everything
would otherwise go, is in the last stage of consumption; his death is
looked for every day. The marriage will take place next winter when
the family are out of mourning. I am told that I shall have a charming
sister-in-law in Mlle. de Mortsauf.

So you see that my father's reasoning is justified. The outcome of
it all has won me many compliments, and my marriage is explained
to everybody's satisfaction. To complete our success, the Prince de
Talleyrand, out of affection for my grandmother, is showing himself a
warm friend to Macumer. Society, which began by criticising me, has now
passed to cordial admiration.

In short, I now reign a queen where, barely two years ago, I was an
insignificant item. Macumer finds himself the object of universal envy,
as the husband of "the most charming woman in Paris." At least a score
of women, as you know, are always in that proud position. Men murmur
sweet things in my ear, or content themselves with greedy glances. This
chorus of longing and admiration is so soothing to one's vanity, that I
confess I begin to understand the unconscionable price women are ready
to pay for such frail and precarious privileges. A triumph of this kind
is like strong wine to vanity, self-love, and all the self-regarding
feelings. To pose perpetually as a divinity is a draught so potent in
its intoxicating effects, that I am no longer surprised to see women
grow selfish, callous, and frivolous in the heart of this adoration. The
fumes of society mount to the head. You lavish the wealth of your soul
and spirit, the treasures of your time, the noblest efforts of your
will, upon a crowd of people who repay you in smiles and jealousy. The
false coin of their pretty speeches, compliments, and flattery is the
only return they give for the solid gold of your courage and sacrifices,
and all the thought that must go to keep up without flagging the
standard of beauty, dress, sparkling talk, and general affability. You
are perfectly aware how much it costs, and that the whole thing is a
fraud, but you cannot keep out of the vortex.

Ah! my sweetheart, how one craves for a real friend! How precious to me
are the love and devotion of Felipe, and how my heart goes out to you!
Joyfully indeed are we preparing for our move to Chantepleurs, where
we can rest from the comedy of the Rue de Bac and of the Paris
drawing-rooms. Having just read your letter again, I feel that I cannot
better describe this demoniac paradise than by saying that no woman of
fashion in Paris can possibly be a good mother.

Good-bye, then, for a short time, dear one. We shall stay at
Chantepleurs only a week at most, and shall be with you about May 10th.
So we are actually to meet again after more than two years! What changes
since then! Here we are, both matrons, both in our promised land—I of
love, you of motherhood.

If I have not written, my sweetest, it is not because I have forgotten
you. And what of the monkey godson? Is he still pretty and a credit to
me? He must be more than nine months' old now. I should dearly like to
be present when he makes his first steps upon this earth; but Macumer
tells me that even precocious infants hardly walk at ten months.

We shall have some good gossips there, and "cut pinafores," as the Blois
folk say. I shall see whether a child, as the saying goes, spoils the
pattern.

P. S.—If you deign to reply from your maternal heights, address to
Chantepleurs. I am just off.

XXXIII. MME. DE L'ESTORADE TO MME. DE MACUMER

My child,—If ever you become a mother, you will find out that it is
impossible to write letters during the first two months of your nursing.
Mary, my English nurse, and I are both quite knocked up. It is true I
had not told you that I was determined to do everything myself.
Before the event I had with my own fingers sewn the baby clothes and
embroidered and edged with lace the little caps. I am a slave, my pet, a
slave day and night.

To begin with, Master Armand-Louis takes his meals when it pleases
him, and that is always; then he has often to be changed, washed, and
dressed. His mother is so fond of watching him sleep, of singing songs
to him, of walking him about in her arms on a fine day, that she has
little time left to attend to herself. In short, what society has been
to you, my child—our child—has been to me!

I cannot tell you how full and rich my life has become, and I long
for your coming that you may see for yourself. The only thing is, I
am afraid he will soon be teething, and that you will find a peevish,
crying baby. So far he has not cried much, for I am always at hand.
Babies only cry when their wants are not understood, and I am constantly
on the lookout for his. Oh! my sweet, my heart has opened up so wide,
while you allow yours to shrink and shrivel at the bidding of society! I
look for your coming with all a hermit's longing. I want so much to know
what you think of l'Estorade, just as you no doubt are curious for my
opinion of Macumer.

Write to me from your last resting-place. The gentlemen want to go and
meet our distinguished guests. Come, Queen of Paris, come to our humble
grange, where love at least will greet you!

XXXIV. MME. DE MACUMER TO THE VICOMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE April 1826.

The name on this address will tell you, dear, that my petition has been
granted. Your father-in-law is now Comte de l'Estorade. I would not
leave Paris till I had obtained the gratification of your wishes, and I
am writing in the presence of the Keeper of the Seals, who has come to
tell me that the patent is signed.

Good-bye for a short time!

XXXV. THE SAME TO THE SAME MARSEILLES, July.

I am ashamed to think how my sudden flight will have taken you by
surprise. But since I am above all honest, and since I love you not one
bit the less, I shall tell you the truth in four words: I am horribly
jealous!

Felipe's eyes were too often on you. You used to have little talks
together at the foot of your rock, which were a torture to me; and I
was fast becoming irritable and unlike myself. Your truly Spanish beauty
could not fail to recall to him his native land, and along with it Marie
Heredia, and I can be jealous of the past too. Your magnificent black
hair, your lovely dark eyes, your brow, where the peaceful joy of
motherhood stands out radiant against the shadows which tell of past
suffering, the freshness of your southern skin, far fairer than that
of a blonde like me, the splendid lines of your figure, the breasts,
on which my godson hangs, peeping through the lace like some luscious
fruit,—all this stabbed me in the eyes and in the heart. In vain did
I stick cornflowers in my curls, in vain set off with cherry-colored
ribbons the tameness of my pale locks, everything looked washed out when
Renee appeared—a Renee so unlike the one I expected to find in your
oasis.

Then Felipe made too much of the child, whom I found myself beginning to
hate. Yes, I confess it, that exuberance of life which fills your house,
making it gay with shouts and laughter—I wanted it for myself. I read a
regret in Macumer's eyes, and, unknown to him, I cried over it two whole
nights. I was miserable in your house. You are too beautiful as a woman,
too triumphant as a mother, for me to endure your company.

Ah! you complained of your lot. Hypocrite! What would you have?
L'Estorade is most presentable; he talks well; he has fine eyes; and his
black hair, dashed with white, is very becoming; his southern manners,
too, have something attractive about them. As far as I can make out, he
will, sooner or later, be elected deputy for the Bouches-du-Rhône; in
the Chamber he is sure to come to the front, for you can always count on
me to promote your interests. The sufferings of his exile have given him
that calm and dignified air which goes half-way, in my opinion, to
make a politician. For the whole art of politics, dear, seems to me to
consist in looking serious. At this rate, Macumer, as I told him, ought
certainly to have a high position in the state.

And so, having completely satisfied myself of your happiness, I fly off,
contented, to my dear Chantepleurs, where Felipe must really achieve his
aspirations. I have made up my mind not to receive you there without a
fine baby at my breast to match yours.

Oh! I know very well I deserve all the epithets you can hurl at me. I am
a fool, a wretch, an idiot. Alas! that is just what jealousy means. I
am not vexed with you, but I was miserable, and you will forgive me
for escaping from my misery. Two days more, and I should have made
an exhibition of myself; yes, there would have been an outbreak of
vulgarity.

But in spite of the rage gnawing at my heart, I am glad to have come,
glad to have seen you in the pride of your beautiful motherhood, my
friend still, as I remain yours in all the absorption of my love. Why,
even here at Marseilles, only a step from your door, I begin to feel
proud of you and of the splendid mother that you will make.

How well you judged your vocation! You seem to me born for the part of
mother rather than of lover, exactly as the reverse is true of me. There
are women capable of neither, hard-favored or silly women. A good mother
and a passionately loving wife have this in common, that they both need
intelligence and discretion ever at hand, and an unfailing command of
every womanly art and grace. Oh! I watched you well; need I add, sly
puss, that I admired you too! Your children will be happy, but not
spoilt, with your tenderness lapping them round and the clear light of
your reason playing softly on them.

Tell Louis the truth about my going away, but find some decent
excuse for your father-in-law, who seems to act as steward for the
establishment; and be careful to do the same for your family—a true
Provencal version of the Harlowe family. Felipe does not know why I
left, and he will never know. If he asks, I shall contrive to find some
colorable pretext, probably that you were jealous of me! Forgive me this
little conventional fib.

Good-bye. I write in haste, as I want you to get this at lunch-time;
and the postilion, who has undertaken to convey it to you, is here,
refreshing himself while he waits.

Many kisses to my dear little godson. Be sure you come to Chantepleurs
in October. I shall be alone there all the time that Macumer is away
in Sardinia, where he is designing great improvements in his estate. At
least that is his plan for the moment, and his pet vanity consists in
having a plan. Then he feels that he has a will of his own, and this
makes him uneasy when he unfolds it to me. Good-bye!

XXXVI. THE VICOMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE TO THE BARONNE DE MACUMER

Dear,—no words can express the astonishment of all our party when, at
luncheon, we were told that you had both gone, and, above all, when the
postilion who took you to Marseilles handed me your mad letter. Why,
naughty child, it was of your happiness, and nothing else, that made the
theme of those talks below the rock, on the "Louise" seat, and you had
not the faintest justification for objecting to them. Ingrata! My
sentence on you is that you return here at my first summons. In that
horrid letter, scribbled on the inn paper, you did not tell me
what would be your next stopping place; so I must address this to
Chantepleurs.

Listen to me, dear sister of my heart. Know first, that my mind is set
on your happiness. Your husband, dear Louise, commands respect, not only
by his natural gravity and dignified expression, but also because he
somehow impresses one with the splendid power revealed in his piquant
plainness and in the fire of his velvet eyes; and you will understand
that it was some little time before I could meet him on those easy terms
which are almost necessary for intimate conversation. Further, this man
has been Prime Minister, and he idolizes you; whence it follows that he
must be a profound dissembler. To fish up secrets, therefore, from the
rocky caverns of this diplomatic soul is a work demanding a skilful hand
no less than a ready brain. Nevertheless, I succeeded at last, without
rousing my victim's suspicions, in discovering many things of which you,
my pet, have no conception.

You know that, between us two, my part is rather that of reason, yours
of imagination: I personify sober duty, you reckless love. It has
pleased fate to continue in our lives this contrast in character
which was imperceptible to all except ourselves. I am a simple country
vicountess, very ambitious, and making it her task to lead her family on
the road to prosperity. On the other hand, Macumer, late Duc de Soria,
has a name in the world, and you, a duchess by right, reign in Paris,
where reigning is no easy matter even for kings. You have a considerable
fortune, which will be doubled if Macumer carries out his projects for
developing his great estates in Sardinia, the resources of which are
matter of common talk at Marseilles. Deny, if you can, that if either
has the right to be jealous, it is not you. But, thank God, we have
both hearts generous enough to place our friendship beyond reach of such
vulgar pettiness.

I know you, dear; I know that, ere now, you are ashamed of having fled.
But don't suppose that your flight will save you from a single word of
discourse which I had prepared for your benefit to-day beneath the rock.
Read carefully then, I beg of you, what I say, for it concerns you even
more closely than Macumer, though he also enters largely into my sermon.

Firstly, my dear, you do not love him. Before two years are over, you
will be sick of adoration. You will never look on Felipe as a husband;
to you he will always be the lover whom you can play with, for that
is how all women treat their lovers. You do not look up to him, or
reverence, or worship him as a woman should the god of her idolatry. You
see, I have made a study of love, my sweet, and more than once have I
taken soundings in the depth of my own heart. Now, as the result of a
careful diagnosis of your case, I can say with confidence, this is not
love.

Yes, dear Queen of Paris, you cannot escape the destiny of all queens.
The day will come when you long to be treated as a light-o'-love, to
be mastered and swept off your feet by a strong man, one who will not
prostrate himself in adoration before you, but will seize your arm
roughly in a fit of jealousy. Macumer loves you too fondly ever to
be able either to resist you or find fault with you. A single glance from
you, a single coaxing word, would melt his sternest resolution. Sooner
or later, you will learn to scorn this excessive devotion. He spoils
you, alas! just as I used to spoil you at the convent, for you are a
most bewitching woman, and there is no escaping your siren-like charms.

Worse than all, you are candid, and it often happens that our happiness
depends on certain social hypocrisies to which you will never stoop. For
instance, society will not tolerate a frank display of the wife's power
over her husband. The convention is that a man must no more show himself
the lover of his wife, however passionately he adores her, than a
married woman may play the part of a mistress. This rule you both
disregard.

In the first place, my child, from what you have yourself told me, it
is clear that the one unpardonable sin in society is to be happy. If
happiness exists, no one must know of it. But this is a small point.
What seems to me important is that the perfect equality which reigns
between lovers ought never to appear in the case of husband and wife,
under pain of undermining the whole fabric of society and entailing
terrible disasters. If it is painful to see a man whom nature has made a
nonentity, how much worse is the spectacle of a man of parts brought
to that position? Before very long you will have reduced Macumer to the
mere shadow of a man. He will cease to have a will and character of his
own, and become mere clay in your hands. You will have so completely
moulded him to your likeness, that your household will consist of only
one person instead of two, and that one necessarily imperfect. You will
regret it bitterly; but when at last you deign to open your eyes, the
evil will be past cure. Do what we will, women do not, and never
will, possess the qualities which are characteristic of men, and these
qualities are absolutely indispensable to family life. Already Macumer,
blinded though he is, has a dim foreshadowing of this future; he feels
himself less a man through his love. His visit to Sardinia is a proof to
me that he hopes by this temporary separation to succeed in recovering
his old self.

You never scruple to use the power which his love has placed in your
hand. Your position of vantage may be read in a gesture, a look, a tone.
Oh! darling, how truly are you the mad wanton your mother called you!
You do not question, I fancy, that I am greatly Louis' superior. Well,
I would ask you, have you ever heard me contradict him? Am I not always,
in the presence of others, the wife who respects in him the authority of
the family? Hypocrisy! you will say. Well, listen to me. It is true that
if I want to give him any advice which I think may be of use to him, I
wait for the quiet and seclusion of our bedroom to explain what I
think and wish; but, I assure you, sweetheart, that even there I never
arrogate to myself the place of mentor. If I did not remain in public
the same submissive wife that I appear to others, he would lose
confidence in himself. Dear, the good we do to others is spoilt unless
we efface ourselves so completely that those we help have no sense of
inferiority. There is a wonderful sweetness in these hidden sacrifices,
and what a triumph for me in your unsuspecting praises of Louis! There
can be no doubt also that the happiness, the comfort, the hope of the
last two years have restored what misfortune, hardship, solitude, and
despondency has robbed him of.

This, then, is the sum-total of my observations. At the present moment
you love in Felipe, not your husband, but yourself. There is truth in
your father's words; concealed by the spring-flowers of your passion
lies all the great lady's selfishness. Ah! my child, how I must love you
to speak such bitter truths!

Let me tell you, if you will promise never to breathe a word of this
to the Baron, the end of our talk. We had been singing your praises
in every key, for he soon discovered that I loved you like a
fondly-cherished sister, and having insensibly brought him to a
confidential mood, I ventured to say:

"Louise has never yet had to struggle with life. She has been the spoilt
child of fortune, and she might yet have to pay for this were you not
there to act the part of father as well as lover."

"Ah! but is it possible?…" He broke off abruptly, like a man who sees
himself on the edge of a precipice. But the exclamation was enough for
me. No doubt, if you had stayed, he would have spoken more freely later.

My sweet, think of the day awaiting you when your husband's strength
will be exhausted, when pleasure will have turned to satiety, and he
sees himself, I will not say degraded, but shorn of his proper dignity
before you. The stings of conscience will then waken a sort of remorse
in him, all the more painful for you, because you will feel yourself
responsible, and you will end by despising the man whom you have not
accustomed yourself to respect. Remember, too, that scorn with a woman
is only the earliest phase of hatred. You are too noble and generous, I
know, ever to forget the sacrifices which Felipe has made for you; but
what further sacrifices will be left for him to make when he has, so to
speak, served up himself at the first banquet? Woe to the man, as to
the woman, who has left no desire unsatisfied! All is over then. To our
shame or our glory—the point is too nice for me to decide—it is of
love alone that women are insatiable.

Oh! Louise, change yet, while there is still time. If you would only
adopt the same course with Macumer that I have done with l'Estorade, you
might rouse the sleeping lion in your husband, who is made of the stuff
of heroes. One might almost say that you grudge him his greatness.
Would you feel no pride in using your power for other ends than your own
gratification, in awakening the genius of a gifted man, as I in raising
to a higher level one of merely common parts?

Had you remained with us, I should still have written this letter, for
in talking you might have cut me short or got the better of me with your
sharp tongue. But I know that you will read this thoughtfully and weigh
my warnings. Dear heart, you have everything in life to make you happy,
do not spoil your chances; return to Paris, I entreat you, as soon
as Macumer comes back. The engrossing claims of society, of which I
complained, are necessary for both of you; otherwise you would spend
your life in mutual self-absorption. A married woman ought not to be too
lavish of herself. The mother of a family, who never gives her household
an opportunity of missing her, runs the risk of palling on them. If I
have several children, as I trust for my own sake I may, I shall make a
point of reserving to myself certain hours which shall be held sacred;
even to one's children one's presence should not be a matter of daily bread.

Farewell, my dear jealous soul! Do you know that many women would be
highly flattered at having roused this passing pang in you? Alas! I can
only mourn, for what is not mother in me is your dear friend. A thousand
loves. Make what excuse you will for leaving; if you are not sure of
Macumer, I am of Louis.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
My beloved beauty,—I fancied seeing Italy, and am delighted to have taken Macumer, whose plans for Sardinia are postponed.

This country is ravishing. The churches and chapels have a seductive, bewitching air that must make every female Protestant yearn for Catholicism. Macumer has been received with acclamation; they are all delighted to have turned so distinguished a man into an Italian. Felipe could have the Sardinian embassy at Paris if I wished, for I am much made of at court.

If you write, address your letters to Florence. I have not time now for details, but I will tell you the story of our travels when you come to Paris. We remain here a week, then go on to Florence, taking Leghorn on the way. We shall stay a month in Tuscany and a month at Naples, so as to reach Rome in November. Thence we return by Venice, where we shall spend the first fortnight of December, and arrive in Paris via Milan and Turin in January.

Our journey is a perfect honeymoon; seeing new places renews our passion. Macumer knew nothing of Italy, and we began with that splendid Cornice road, which might be the work of fairy architects.

Good-bye, darling. Don't be angry if I don't write. It's impossible to get a minute to oneself while traveling; my whole time is taken up with seeing, admiring, and fixing my impressions. But I will tell you nothing of these until memory has given them their proper atmosphere.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XXXVIII. THE VICOMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE TO THE BARONNE DE MACUMER
September.

My dear,—There is a full reply to the letter you wrote me from Marseilles waiting for you at Chantepleurs. This honeymoon journey, far from dispelling the fears I then expressed, makes me beg you to have my letter forwarded from Nivernais.

They say the Government are resolved on dissolution. This is unlucky for the Crown, since the last session of this loyal Parliament would have been devoted to passing laws essential to consolidating its power; it is no less unfortunate for us, as Louis will not be forty until the end of 1827. Fortunately, however, my father has agreed to stand, and he will resign his seat when the right moment arrives.

Your godson has learnt to walk without his godmother's help. He is altogether delicious and begins to make the prettiest little signs to me, which show that here is really a thinking being, not a mere animal or sucking machine. His smiles are full of meaning. I have been so successful in my profession as nurse that I shall wean Armand in December. A year at the breast is quite enough; children suckled longer are said to grow stupid, and I am entirely for popular sayings.

You must make a tremendous sensation in Italy, my fair one with the golden locks. A thousand loves.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XXXIX. THE BARONNE DE MACUMER TO THE VICOMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE

Your atrocious letter has reached me; the steward forwarded it by my orders. Renée... I will spare you an outburst and simply tell you what your letter produced.

We had just returned from a delightful reception given in our honor by the ambassador, where I shone and Macumer was carried away in a frenzy of love. Then I read him your horrible answer to my letter, sobbing as I read it, at the risk of making a spectacle of myself. My dear Arab fell at my feet, declaring you mad. He carried me to the balcony of the palace where we are staying, which looks over part of the city; there he spoke words fit for the magnificent moonlight. We both speak Italian now, and his love, told in that voluptuous tongue, sounded like exquisite poetry. He swore that, even if you were right in your predictions, he would not exchange for a lifetime a single one of our blessed nights and charming mornings. At this reckoning he has already lived a thousand years. He is content to have me as his mistress and claims no other title than lover. So proud and pleased is he to be daily the chosen of my heart, that were Heaven to offer him the alternative between living as you would have us do for another thirty years with five children, or five years amid the dear roses of our love, he would not hesitate: he would take my love and death.

While he whispered this with his arm round me, my head on his shoulder, a bat's cries, surprised by an owl, disturbed us. The death-cry so terrified me that Felipe carried me half-fainting to my bed. Don't be alarmed! Though this augury still resounds in my soul, I am myself this morning. As soon as I was up, I went to Felipe, and kneeling before him, eyes fixed on his, hands clasped in his, I said:—

"My love, I am a child, and Renée may be right after all. It may be only your love that I love in you; but at least this is the one feeling of my heart, and I love you as I am able. If there be aught in me, in my lightest thought or deed, which jars on your wishes or conception of me, tell me. It will be joy to take your eyes as the guiding stars of my life. Renée has frightened me, for she is a true friend."

Macumer could not reply; tears choked him.

I can thank you now, Renée. But for your letter I should not have known the depths of love in my noble, kingly Macumer. Rome is the city of love; it is there that passion should celebrate its feast, with art and religion as confederates.

At Venice we shall find the Duc and Duchesse de Soria. If you write, address now to Paris, for we leave Rome in three days. The ambassador's was a farewell party.

P.S. — Dear, silly child, your letter only shows you knew nothing of love except theoretically. Learn that love is a quickening force producing fruits so diverse no theory can embrace them. A word for my little Professor with her armor of stays.

XL. THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE TO THE BARONNE DE MACUMER January 1827.

My father has been elected to the Chamber, my father-in-law is dead, and I am on the point of my second confinement; these are the chief events marking the end of the year for us. I mention them at once, lest the black seal should frighten you.

My dear, your letter from Rome made my flesh creep. You are nothing but a pair of children. Felipe is either a dissembling diplomat or else his love for you is such as a man might have for a courtesan, on whom he squanders himself, knowing she is false. Enough. You say I rave, so I will hold my tongue. From the contrast of our destinies I draw this moral—Love not if you would be loved.

When Louis was elected to the provincial Council he received the cross of the Legion of Honor. That was nearly three years ago; my father—whom you will likely see in Paris during the session—has asked the rank of Officer of the Legion for his son-in-law, and I want to know if you will kindly take in hand whoever is in a position to influence this patronage and keep an eye on the affair. But, whatever you do, don't get entangled in my father's concerns. The Comte de Maucombe is fishing for the title of Marquis for himself; keep your services for me. When Louis is a deputy next winter we shall come to Paris and then move heaven and earth to get him a Government appointment, so that we may save by living on his salary. My father sits between the centre and the right; a title will content him. Our family was distinguished in the days of King René, and Charles X. will hardly say no to a Maucombe; but what I fear is that my father may think to ask some favor for my younger brother. If the marquisate is dangled out of his reach, he will have no thoughts to spare from himself.

January 15th.

Ah, Louise, I have been in hell. If I can bear to tell you of my anguish, it is because you are another self; yet I don't know whether I shall ever live again in thought those five ghastly days. The mere word "convulsions" sickens me. Five days! to me they were five centuries. A mother who has not been through this martyrdom does not know what suffering is. So frenzied was I that I even envied you, who never had a child!

The evening before that terrible day the weather was close, almost hot, and I thought little Armand was affected. Generally so sweet and caressing, he was peevish, cried for nothing, wanted to play, then broke his toys. Perhaps such fractiousness is the sign of approaching illness with children. While I wondered, I noticed his cheeks flush, but I blamed teething, for he is cutting four large teeth at once. I put him to bed beside me and kept waking through the night. He was a little feverish, but not enough to alarm me; my mind was still full of teething. Towards morning he cried "Mamma!" and asked by signs for drink; but the cry was spasmodic, and there were convulsive twitchings in the limbs that chilled me. I jumped up to fetch a cup. Imagine my horror when, on my handing it to him, he remained motionless, repeating "Mamma!" in a strange, nearly voiceless tone. His hand did not respond; it was stiff. He gulped a few convulsive mouthfuls; the water made a strange sound in his throat. He clung to me desperately, his eyes rolled as if some hidden force pulled them till only the whites were visible; his limbs turned rigid. I screamed, and Louis came.

"A doctor! quick! ... he is dying," I cried.

Louis vanished; Armand again gasped "Mamma!" and then lost all consciousness of me. The veins on his forehead swelled, and the convulsions began. For an hour before the doctors came I held in my arms that merry baby, the blossom of my life, lifeless as a bit of wood; his eyes! I cannot think of them without horror. My pretty Armand was a mere mummy—black, shriveled, misshapen.

A doctor, two doctors, brought from Marseilles by Louis hovered about like birds of ill omen; it made me shudder. One spoke of brain fever, the other of ordinary infant convulsions. Our country doctor seemed to have the most sense; he offered no opinion. "It's teething," said one. "Fever," said the other. Finally they agreed to put leeches on his neck and ice on his head. It seemed like death. To look on and see a corpse, all purple or black, with not a cry nor movement from the creature who had been so full of life—horrible!

At one moment I lost my head and gave a sort of hysterical laugh as I saw the pretty neck I used to kiss with leeches feeding on it, his darling head in a cap of ice. We had to cut off those lovely curls, of which we were so proud, to make room for the ice. The convulsions returned every ten minutes, regular as labor pains, and the poor baby writhed and twisted, now white, now violet. His supple limbs struck like wood. This unconscious flesh used to smile and prattle and say "Mamma!" At the thought a storm of agony swept over me. It seemed as though every tie binding child to mother were strained almost to rending. My mother, who might have helped or comforted me, was in Paris. Mothers, I believe, know more than doctors about convulsions.

After four days and nights of suspense that almost killed me, the doctors unanimously advised a horrid ointment that would produce open sores. Sores on my Armand! who five days before was playing and laughing and trying to say "Godmother!" I refused, trusting nature. Louis, who believes in doctors, scolded me. But there are moments when this disease looks like death, and in one of these it seemed borne in upon me that this hateful remedy might be his salvation. The skin was so dry, rough, and parched that the ointment would not act. I broke into weeping and the bedside was wet; the doctors were at dinner!

Left alone with the child, I stripped him of medical appliances and, seizing him like a madwoman, pressed him to my bosom, laying my forehead against his, beseeching God to give him life which I sought to pass into him. For some minutes I held him thus, longing to die with him, so that neither life nor death might part us. Dear, I felt his limbs relax; the writhings ceased; he stirred, and the ghastly tints faded! I screamed as when he first fell ill; the doctors hurried up, and I pointed to Armand.

"He is saved!" exclaimed the oldest.

What music in those words! The gates of heaven opened. Two hours later Armand came back to life; but I was utterly crushed, and only the healing power of joy saved me from serious illness. My God! by what tortures do you bind a mother to her child! To fasten him to our heart, need nails be driven into the quick? Was I not mother enough before? I, who wept over his broken syllables and tottering steps, who spent hours planning my duty—why these horrors for a mother who already idolized her child?

As I write, Armand is playing, shouting, laughing. What is the cause of this terrible childhood disease? Vainly I puzzle: teething? a brain process? something wrong with the nervous system? All these thoughts disquiet me, especially as I am again with child. Our country doctor holds to nervous trouble from teething. I would give every tooth in my head to see little Armand all through. The sight of one of those white pearls peeping from the swollen gum gives me a cold sweat now. The heroism with which the little angel bore his sufferings proves he will be his mother's son. A look from him goes to my very heart.

Medical science gives no satisfactory explanation of this tetanus-like malady, which passes as rapidly as it comes and seems neither preventable nor curable. One thing is certain: it is hell for a mother to see her child convulsed. How passionately do I clasp him to my heart! I could walk forever with him in my arms!

To have suffered this only six weeks before my confinement made it worse; I feared for the coming child. Farewell, my dear beloved. Don't wish for a child—that is the sum and substance of my letter!

XLI. THE BARONNE DE MACUMER TO THE VICOMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE Paris.

Poor sweet,—Macumer and I forgave you all your naughtiness when we heard of your terrible trouble. I thrilled with pain as I read the details of the double agony, and there seem compensations now in being childless.

I write at once to tell you that Louis has been promoted. He can now wear the ribbon of an Officer of the Legion. You are a lucky woman, Renée, and you will probably have a little girl, since that used to be your wish!

The marriage of my brother with Mlle. de Mortsauf was celebrated on our return. Our gracious King, who is extraordinarily kind, has given my brother the reversion of the post of first gentleman of the chamber, which his father-in-law now fills, on the one condition that the Mortsauf scutcheon be placed side by side with that of the Lenoncourts.

"The office ought to go with the title," he said to the Duc de Lenoncourt-Givry.

My father is justified a hundred-fold. Without my fortune nothing of this could have taken place. My father and mother came from Madrid for the wedding and return there after the reception I give tomorrow for the bride and bridegroom.

The carnival will be very gay. The Duc and Duchesse de Soria are in Paris, and their presence makes me a little uneasy. Marie Heredia is certainly one of the most beautiful women in Europe, and I don't like the way Felipe looks at her. Therefore I am doubly lavish of sweetness and caresses. Every look and gesture speak what my lips do not: "She could not love like this!" Heaven knows how lovely and fascinating I am! Yesterday Mme. de Maufrigneuse said to me, "Dear child, who can compete with you?"

I keep Felipe so well amused that his sister-in-law must seem as lively as a Spanish cow in comparison. I am not sorry a little Abencerrage is not on his way, because the Duchess will no doubt stay in Paris over her confinement, and she won't be a beauty any longer. If the baby is a boy, it will be called Felipe, in honor of the exile. An unkind chance has decreed that I shall, a second time, serve as godmother.

Good-bye, dear. I shall go to Chantepleurs early this year, for our Italian tour was shockingly expensive. I shall leave about the end of March and retire to economize in Nivernais. Besides, I am tired of Paris. Felipe sighs, as I do, after the beautiful quiet of the park, our cool meadows, and our Loire, with its sparkling sands—peerless among rivers. Chantepleurs will seem delightful after the pomps and vanities of Italy; for, after all, splendor becomes wearisome, and a lover's glance has more beauty than a capo d'opera or a bel quadro!

We shall expect you there. Don't fear that I shall be jealous again. You are free to take what soundings you please in Macumer's heart, and fish up all the interjections and doubts you can. I am supremely indifferent. Since that day in Rome Felipe's love for me has grown. He told me yesterday (he is looking over my shoulder now) that his sister-in-law, the Princess Heredia, his old destined bride, the dream of his youth, had no brains. Oh, my dear, I am worse than a ballet-dancer! If you knew what joy that slighting remark gave me! I have pointed out to Felipe that she does not speak French correctly: she says exemple for exemple, sain for cinq, cheu for je. She is beautiful, of course, but quite without charm or wit. When a compliment is paid her, she looks at you as though she did not know what to do with such a strange thing. Felipe, being what he is, could not have lived two months with Marie after his marriage. Don Fernand, the Duc de Soria, suits her very well. He has generous instincts, but one sees he has been a spoilt child. I am tempted to be naughty and make you laugh; but I won't draw the long bow. Ever so much love, darling.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
My little girl is two months old. She is called Jeanne-Athenais; her godmother is my mother, and her godfather an old grand-uncle of Louis'.

I shall start for Chantepleurs as soon as I can, since you are not afraid of a nursing mother. Your godson can say your name now — he calls it Matoumer, since he can't pronounce c properly. You will be quite delighted with him. He has all his teeth and eats meat like a big boy; he's everywhere, trotting about like a little mouse. I watch him anxiously, and it pains me that I cannot keep him with me when I'm laid up. The time drags more than usual, the doctors requiring special precautions. Alas, habit does not make child-bearing easier; the same old discomforts and misgivings remain. However (don't show this to Felipe), she takes after me and may yet cut out your Armand.

My father thought Felipe looked very thin, and my dear pet not so blooming. The Duc and Duchesse de Soria have gone; no loophole for jealousy remains! Is there any trouble you are hiding from me? Your letter is neither as long nor as full of loving thoughts as usual — is this only a whim of my dear whimsical friend?

I'm running on. My nurse is angry with me for writing, and Mlle. Athenais de l'Estorade wants her dinner. Farewell; write me some nice long letters.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XLIII. MME. DE MACUMER TO THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE

For the first time in my life, my dear Renée, I have been alone and
crying. I sat beneath a willow on a bench by the long Chantepleurs
marsh. The view is charming, but it needs merry children to complete it,
and I wait for you. I have been married nearly three years, and no
child! The thought of your quiver full drove me to explore my heart.

This is what I find there. "Oh! if I had to suffer a hundred-fold what
Renée suffered when my godson was born; if I had to see my child in
convulsions, even so would to God that I might have a cherub of my own,
like your Athénaïs!" I can see her in my mind's eye, and I know she is
beautiful as the day, for you tell me nothing about her—that is just
like my Renée! I believe you divine my trouble.

Each time my hopes are disappointed, I fall for days into the blackest
melancholy. Then I compose sad elegies. When shall I embroider little
caps and sew lace edgings to encircle a tiny head? When choose the
cambric for baby-clothes? Shall I never hear baby lips shout "Maman,"
and have my dress pulled by a teasing despot whom my heart adores? Are
there to be no wheelmarks of a little carriage on the gravel, no broken
toys in the courtyard? Shall I never visit toy-shops to buy swords,
dolls, and baby-houses? Will it never be mine to watch the unfolding of
a precious life—another Felipe, only more dear? I would have a son, if
only to learn how a lover can be more to one as his second self.

My park and castle are cold and desolate to me. A childless woman is a
monstrosity of nature; we exist to be mothers. Oh! my sage in woman's
livery, how well you have conned the book of life! Everywhere, too,
barrenness is dismal. My life is a little like one of Gessner's or
Florian's sheepfolds, which Rivarol longed to see invaded by a wolf. I
too have it in me to make sacrifices! There are forces in me that
Felipe has no use for; and if I am not to be a mother, I must be allowed
some romantic sorrow.

I just made this remark to my belated Moor, and it brought tears to his
eyes. He cannot stand any joking on his love, so I let him off easily,
and only called him a paladin of folly.

At times I am seized with a desire to go on pilgrimage, to bear my
longings to the shrine of some madonna or to a watering-place. Next
winter I shall take medical advice. I am too enraged with myself to
write more. Good-bye.

XLIV. THE SAME TO THE SAME Paris, 1829.

A whole year passed, my dear, without a letter! What does this mean? I
am a little hurt. Do you suppose that your Louis, who comes to see me
almost every alternate day, makes up for you? It is not enough to know
that you are well and that everything prospers; I love you, Renée, and I
want to know what you are feeling and thinking, just as I say
everything to you, at the risk of being scolded, censured, or
misunderstood. Your silence and seclusion in the country, when you might
be in Paris enjoying all the Parliamentary honors of the Comte de
l'Estorade, cause me anxiety. You know your husband's "gift of gab" and
unsparing zeal have won him a position here, and he will doubtless
receive a good post when the session is over. Pray, do you spend your
life writing him advice? Numa was not so far from his Egeria.

Why did you not take this opportunity of seeing Paris? I might have
enjoyed your company for four months. Louis told me yesterday that you
were coming to fetch him, and would have your third confinement in
Paris—your terrible mother Gigogne! After bombarding Louis with queries
and regrets, I at last discovered that his grand-uncle, Athénaïs' godfather,
is very ill. Now I believe that you, like a careful mother, would be
equal to angling with the member's speeches and fame for a fat legacy
from your husband's last remaining relative on the mother's side. Keep
your mind easy, my Renée—we are all at work for Louis, Lenoncourts,
Chaulieus, and the whole band of Mme. de Macumer's followers. Martignac
will probably put him into the audit department. But if you won't tell
me why you bury yourself in the country, I shall be cross.

Tell me, are you afraid that the political wisdom of the house of
l'Estorade should seem to centre in you? Or is it the uncle's legacy?
Perhaps you were afraid you would be less to your children in Paris? Ah!
what I would give to know whether, after all, you were not simply too
vain to show yourself in Paris for the first time in your present
condition! Vain thing! Farewell.

XLV. RENÉE TO LOUISE

You complain of my silence; have you forgotten those two little brown
heads, at once my subjects and my tyrants? And as to staying at home,
you yourself hit upon several of my reasons. Apart from our dear uncle's
condition, I didn't want to drag to Paris a boy of four and a little girl
who will soon be three, when I am again expecting confinement. I had no
intention of troubling you and upsetting your husband with such a
party. I did not care to appear looking my worst in the brilliant circle
you preside over, and I detest life in hotels and lodgings.

When I come to spend the session in Paris, it will be in my own house.
Louis' uncle, on hearing of his rank, made me a present of two hundred
thousand francs (half his savings) with which to buy a house in Paris,
and I have charged Louis to find one in your neighborhood. My mother has
given me thirty thousand francs for furnishing, and I will not disgrace
the dear sister of my election—no pun intended.

I am grateful to you for having already done so much at Court for
Louis. But though M. de Bourmont and M. de Polignac have paid him the
compliment of asking him to join their ministry, I do not wish so
conspicuous a place for him. It would commit him too much; I prefer the
Audit Office because it is permanent. Our affairs are in good hands; as
soon as the steward has mastered the details, I will come support Louis.

As for writing long letters nowadays, how can I. This one, in which I
want to describe the daily routine of my life, will be a week on the
stocks. Who can tell but Armand may lay hold of it to make caps for his
regiments drawn up on my carpet, or vessels for the fleets which sail
his bath! A single day will serve as a sample, for they are all exactly
alike, their characteristics reducing to two—either the children are
well, or they are not. For me, in this solitary grange, hours become
minutes, or minutes hours, according to the children's health.

If I have some delightful hours, it is when they are asleep and I am no
longer needed to rock one or soothe the other with stories. When they
sleep by my side, I say to myself, "Nothing can go wrong now." The fact
is, every mother, when her children are out of sight, imagines dangers
for them. Perhaps Armand seizes the razors to play, or his coat takes
fire, or a snake bites him, or he tumbles and gets an abscess, or he
might drown in a pond. A mother's life is a long succession of dramas,
soft and tender, now terrible. Not an hour but has its joys and fears.

But at night, in my room, comes the hour for waking dreams, when I plan
their future, which shines in the smile of the guardian angel watching
over their beds. Sometimes Armand calls me in his sleep; I kiss his
forehead (without rousing him), then his sister's feet, and watch them
lying in their beauty. These are my merry-makings! Yesterday our angel
roused me to Athénaïs' cradle. Her head was too low, and I found Armand
all uncovered, his feet purple with cold.

"Darling mother!" he cried, flinging his arms round me.

There, dear, is one of our night scenes for you.

How important it is for a mother to have her children by her side at
night! A nurse, however careful, cannot take them up, comfort them, and
hush them when some horrid nightmare has disturbed them. They have
dreams, and explaining away one of those dread visions is harder
because the child is scared and only half awake. I sleep so lightly that
I can see my little pair stirring through the veil of my eyelids. A
sigh or a rustle wakens me. For me, the demon of convulsions crouches by
their beds.

So much for the nights; with the first twitter of birds my babies stir.
Through the mists of sleep, their chatter blends with the warblings filling
the morning air. While Nais struggles to get at me, making the passage
from her cradle to my bed on all fours or with staggering steps, Armand
climbs up with the agility of a monkey, and has his arms round me. Then
the merry couple turn my bed into a playground, where mother lies at
their mercy. The baby-girl pulls my hair and would take to sucking again,
while Armand stands guard over my breast, as though defending his
property. Their funny ways and peals of laughter put sleep to flight.

Then we play the ogress game; mother ogress eats up the white, soft
flesh with hugs, and rains kisses on those rosy shoulders and eyes
brimming with saucy mischief; we have little jealous tiffs too, so
pretty to see. It has happened to me to take up my stockings at eight
o'clock and be still barefoot at nine!

Then comes the getting up. I slip on my dressing-gown, turn up my
sleeves, and don the mackintosh apron; with Mary's help I wash and scrub
my two little blossoms. I am sole arbiter of the bath temperature, for
half of children's crying and whimpering comes from mistakes here. Now
is the time for paper fleets and glass ducks, since the only way to get
children thoroughly washed is to keep them amused. If you knew the
diversions that must be invented before these despotic sovereigns will
permit a soft sponge over every nook and cranny, you would be awestruck
at the ingenuity and intelligence demanded by the maternal profession
when taken seriously. Prayers, scoldings, promises are all in requisition;
above all, the jugglery must be so dexterous it defies detection. The
case would be desperate had not Providence matched the child's cunning
with the mother's. A child is a diplomatist, only to be mastered, like
diplomatists of the great world, through his passions! Happily it takes
little to make these cherubs laugh; the fall of a brush or a piece of
soap slipping brings merry shouts! And if our triumphs are dearly bought,
still triumphs they are, though hidden from mortal eye. Even the father
knows nothing of it all. None but God and His angels—and perhaps you—
can fathom the looks of satisfaction Mary and I exchange when the little
creatures' toilet is at last concluded, and they stand, spotless and
shining, amid a chaos of soap, sponges, combs, basins, blotting-paper,
flannel, and all the nameless litter of a true English "nursery."

For I am so far a convert as to admit English women have a talent for
this department. True, they view the child mainly in terms of material
well-being; but where this is concerned, their arrangements are
admirable. My children must always be bare-legged and wear woollen
socks. There shall be no swaddling nor bandages; on the other hand,
they shall never be left alone. The helplessness of the French infant
in swaddling-bands means the liberty of the nurse—that is the whole
explanation. A mother who is really a mother is never free.

There is my answer to your question why I do not write. Besides managing
the estate, I have the upbringing of two children on my hands.

Motherhood involves silent, unobtrusive self-denial, an hourly devotion
to minute details. The soup warming before the fire must be watched.
Am I the kind of woman to shirk such cares? The humblest task may earn a
rich harvest of affection. How pretty is a child's laugh when he finds
food to his liking! Armand has a way of nodding his head when pleased
that is worth a lifetime of adoration. How could I leave to any one else
the privilege and delight, as well as the responsibility, of blowing on
the spoonful of soup too hot for my little Nais, my nursling of seven
months ago, who still remembers my breast? When a nurse has allowed a
child to burn its tongue with scalding food, she tells the mother the
child cried from hunger. How could a mother sleep in peace with the
thought that a breath less pure than her own has cooled her child's
food—the mother whom Nature made the direct vehicle of food to infant
lips. To mince a chop for Nais, who has just cut her last teeth, and mix
the meat, cooked to a turn, with potatoes, is a work of patience, and
there are times when none but a mother could succeed in making an
impatient child eat.

No number of servants, then, and no English nurse can dispense a mother
from taking the field in that daily contest, where gentleness alone
should grapple with the little griefs and pains of childhood. Louise,
the care of these innocent darlings engages the whole soul. To whose
hand and eyes but one's own intrust feeding, dressing, and putting to
bed? Broadly, a crying child condemns mother or nurse, except when the
cry is natural pain. Now that I have two to look after (and a third on
the road), they occupy all my thoughts. Even you, whom I love so dearly,
have become a memory.

My own dressing is not always completed by two o'clock. I have no faith
in mothers whose rooms are in apple-pie order and who might have
stepped out of a bandbox. Yesterday was one of those early April days,
and I wanted to take my children for a walk while I was still able—the
warning bell is in my ears. Such an expedition is quite an epic to a
mother! One dreams of it the night before! Armand was to put on a little
black velvet jacket, a new collar I had worked, a Scotch cap with the
Stuart colors and cock's feathers; Nais was to be in white and pink with
one of those delicious baby caps; she is a baby still, though she will
lose that title on the arrival of the impatient youngster, whom I call
my beggar, for he will have the portion of a younger son. (You see,
Louise, the child has already appeared to me in a vision, so I know it
is a boy.)

Well, caps, collars, jackets, socks, dainty shoes, pink garters, the
muslin frock with silk embroidery—all was laid out on my bed. Then the
little brown heads had to be brushed, twittering merrily like birds,
answering each other's call. Armand's hair is in curls, while Nais' is
brought forward softly on the forehead as a border to the pink-and-white
cap. Then the shoes are buckled; when the little bare legs and well-shod
feet had trotted off to the nursery, with two shining faces (clean,
Mary calls them) and eyes aflame, my heart beat fast. To look on
children one's own hand has arrayed, the pure skin brightly veined with
blue, that one has bathed, laved, and decked with silk or velvet—no
poem comes near it! With what eager, covetous longing one calls them for
one more kiss on those white necks, which even the loveliest woman in
simple collars cannot rival. Even the coarsest lithograph makes a
mother pause, and I feast my eyes daily on the living picture!

Once out of doors, triumphant in my labors, while admiring Armand's
princely air as he helped baby totter along the path, I saw a carriage
coming and tried to get them out of the way. The children tumbled into a
dirty puddle, and lo! my works of art were ruined! We had to take them
back and change. I took the little one in my arms, never thinking of my
own dress, which was ruined, while Mary seized Armand, and the cavalcade
re-entered. With a crying baby and a soaked child, what mind has a
mother left for herself?

Dinner arrives, and as a rule I have done nothing. Now comes the
problem which faces me twice every day—how to suffice in my own person
for two children, put on their bibs, turn up their sleeves, and get
them to eat. In the midst of these cares, joys, and catastrophes, the
only person neglected in the house is myself. If the children have been
naughty, often I don't get rid of my curl-papers all day. Their tempers
rule my toilet. As the price of a few minutes in which I write you these
half-dozen pages, I have had to let them cut pictures out of my novels,
build castles with books, chessmen, or mother-of-pearl counters, and
give Nais my silks and wools to arrange in her fashion, which, I assure
you, is so complicated that she is entirely absorbed and has not uttered
a word.

Yet I have nothing to complain of. My children are strong and
independent; they amuse themselves more easily than you would think.
They find delight in everything; a guarded liberty is worth many toys.
A few pebbles—pink, yellow, purple, and black, small shells, the
mysteries of sand, are a world of pleasure. Their wealth consists in a
multitude of small things. I watch Armand talking to flowers, flies,
chickens, and imitating them. He is on friendly terms with insects and
never wearies of admiring them. Everything minute interests them.
Armand is beginning to ask "why" about everything. He has come to ask
what I am saying to his godmother, whom he looks on as a fairy. Strange
how children hit the mark!

Alas! my sweet, I would not sadden you with the tale of my joys. Let me
give some notion of your godson's character. The other day a poor man
begging followed us—beggars soon find out a mother with her child. Armand
has no idea what hunger is, and money is a sealed book to him; but I had
just bought him a trumpet he longed for. He held it out to the old man
with a kingly air, saying:

"Here, take this!"

What joy the world can give would compare with such a moment?

"May I keep it?" said the poor man to me. "I too, madame, have had
children," he added, hardly noticing the money I put into his hand.

I shudder when I think Armand must go to school, and that I have only
three and a half years more to keep him by me. The flowers of his sunny
childhood will fall before the scythe of the public school; his gracious
ways and bewitching candor will lose spontaneity. They will cut the
curls I have brushed and kissed so often! What will they do with the
thinking being that is Armand?

And what of you? You tell me nothing of your life. Are you still in
love with Felipe? As regards the Saracen, I have no uneasiness.
Good-bye; Nais has just had a tumble, and if I run on like this my
letter will become a volume.

XLVI. MME. DE MACUMER TO THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE 1829.

My sweet, tender Renée, you will have learned from the papers the
terrible calamity which has overwhelmed me. I have not been able to
write even a word. For twenty days I never left his bedside; I received
his last breath and closed his eyes; I kept holy watch with priests and
repeated the prayers for the dead. The cruel pangs I suffered were
accepted by me as a rightful punishment; and yet, when I saw on his calm
lips the smile which was his last farewell, how was it possible to
believe I had caused his death!

Be it so or not, he is gone, and I am left. To you, who have known us
both so well, what more need I say? These words contain all. Oh! I would
give my share of Heaven to hear the flattering tale that my prayers
could bring him back! To see him again, to have him once more mine,
were it only for a second, would let me draw breath without mortal
agony. Will you not come soon and soothe me with such promises? Is not
your love strong enough to deceive me?

But stay! it was you who told me beforehand that he would suffer through
me. Was it so indeed? Yes, it is true, I had no right to his love. Like
a thief, I took what was not mine, and my frenzied grasp has crushed the
life out of my bliss. The madness is over now, but I feel alone. Merciful
God! what torture of the damned can exceed the misery in that word?

When they took him away from me, I lay on the same bed and hoped to
die. There was but a door between us, and it seemed I had strength to
force it! But, alas, I was too young for death; after forty days,
during which with cruel care and the sorry inventions of medical
science they slowly nursed me back to life, I find myself in the
country, seated by my window, surrounded with the flowers he made bloom
for me, gazing on the splendid view over which his eyes often wandered,
and which he was proud to have discovered, since it gave me pleasure.
Ah! Renée, no words can tell how new surroundings hurt when the heart
is dead. I shiver at the sight of the moist earth in my garden, for the
earth is a vast tomb, and it is almost as though I walked on him! When
I first went out, I trembled and could not move. It was so sad to see
his flowers, and he not there!

My father and mother are in Spain. You know what my brothers are, and you
are detained in the country. But need not be uneasy about me; two
angels of mercy flew to my side. The Duc and Duchesse de Soria hastened
to their brother in his illness and have been everything heart could
wish. The last nights before the end found the three of us gathered in
calm, wordless grief, round the bed where this great man breathed his
last, a man among a thousand, rare in any age, head and shoulders above
the rest in everything. The patient resignation of my Felipe was
angelic. The sight of his brother and Marie gave him a moment's pleasure
and easing of pain.

"Darling," he said to me with the simple frankness that never deserted
him, "I had almost gone from life without leaving to Fernand the
Barony of Macumer; I must make a new will. My brother will forgive me;
he knows what it is to love!"

I owe my life to my brother-in-law and his wife; they want to carry me
off to Spain!

Ah! Renée, to no one but you can I speak freely of my grief. A sense of
my faults weighs me to the ground, and there is a bitter solace in
pouring them out to you, poor, unheeded Cassandra. The exactions, the
preposterous jealousy, the nagging unrest of my passion wore him to
death. My love was dangerous because we had both exquisitely sensitive
natures; we spoke the same language, nothing was lost on him, and often
the mocking shaft, so carelessly discharged, went straight to his heart.
You can have no idea of the point to which he carried submissiveness.
I had only to tell him to go and leave me alone, and the caprice,
however wounding, would be obeyed without a murmur. His last breath
was spent in blessing me and repeating that a single morning alone with
me was more precious to him than a lifetime with another woman, were she
even the Marie of his youth. My tears fall as I write.

This is my life now. I rise at midday and go to bed at seven; I linger
absurdly long over meals; I saunter slowly, standing motionless an hour
before a single plant; I gaze into the leafy trees; I take a sober
interest in mere nothings; I long for shade, silence, and night; in a
word, I fight through each hour and take a gloomy pleasure in adding it
to the heap of the vanquished. My peaceful park gives the company I
care for; everything there is full of glorious images of my vanished
joy, invisible to others but eloquent to me.

"I cannot away with you Spaniards!" I exclaimed one morning, as my
sister-in-law flung herself on my neck. "You have some nobility we lack."

Ah! Renée, if I still live, it is doubtless because Heaven tempers
affliction to the strength of those who must bear it. Only a woman can
know what it is to lose a love springing from the heart and genuine,
a passion satisfying spirit and flesh. How rare to find a man so gifted
that to worship him brings no degradation! If such supreme fortune befall
us once, we cannot hope for it again. Men of true greatness, whose
strength and worth are veiled by poetic grace and who charm by high
spiritual power, men made to be adored, beware of love! Love will ruin
you, and ruin the woman of your heart. This is my cry as I pace my
woodland walks.

And he has left me no child! That love so rich in smiles, which rained
perpetual flowers and joy, has left no fruit. I am a thing accursed. Can
it be that, even as polar ice and torrid sand are alike intolerant of
life, so the purity and vehemence of a single-hearted passion render it
barren as hate? Is it only a marriage of reason, such as yours, which is
blessed with a family? Can Heaven be jealous of our passions? There are
wild words.

You are, I believe, the one person whose company I could endure. Come to
me, then; none but Renée should be with Louise in her sombre garb. What
a day when I first put on my widow's bonnet! When I saw myself arrayed
in black, I fell back on a seat and wept till night; and I weep again as
I recall that moment of anguish.

Good-bye. Writing tires me; thoughts crowd fast, but I have no heart to
put them into words. Bring your children; you can nurse baby here without
making me jealous; all that is gone, he is not here, and I shall be glad
to see my godson. Felipe used to wish for a child like little Armand.
Come, then, come and help me bear my woe.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
When you hold this letter I shall already be near, for I start a few minutes after sending it. We shall be alone together. Louis must remain in Provence because of the approaching elections. He seeks re‑election, and the Liberals are plotting against his return.

I do not come to comfort you; I bring my heart to beat in sympathy with yours and to help you bear life. I bid you weep, for only with tears can you purchase the joy of meeting him again. Remember, he is traveling toward Heaven, and every step you take brings you nearer to him. Every duty done breaks a link in the chain that keeps you apart.

Louise, in my arms you will once more lift your head and go on your way to him—pure, noble, cleansed of those errors that had no root in your heart, and bearing the harvest of good deeds you will accomplish here in his name.

I scribble these hasty lines amid the bustle of preparation, interrupted by the babies and by Armand, who keeps saying, "Godmother! I want to see her," till I am almost jealous. He might be your child!

SECOND PART
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
XLVIII. THE BARONNE DE MACUMER TO THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE October 15, 1833.

Yes, Renée, it is true; you have been told. I have sold my house, Chantepleurs, and the farms in Seine-et-Marne—but no more, I am neither mad nor ruined.

Let us be practical. When all was wound up, I had left of poor Macumer's fortune about twelve hundred thousand francs. I will account, as to a practical sister, for every franc.

I put a million into the Three per Cents when they were at fifty; I now receive sixty thousand francs a year instead of the thirty thousand the property yielded. Consider my former life: six months a year in the country renewing leases, listening to farmers' complaints who paid when they pleased, bored like a sportsman in wet weather; produce to sell, always at a loss. In Paris my house represented a rental of ten thousand francs; I had to invest money at the notaries, wait for interest, sue for repayments, and study mortgage law. In short, business in Nivernais, Seine-et-Marne, and Paris—a burden and a vexing, losing game for a widow of twenty-seven!

Now my fortune is secured on the Budget. Instead of paying taxes to the State, I receive, every half-year, thirty thousand francs in thirty notes, handed over at the Treasury by a dapper clerk who smiles when he sees me.

Supposing the nation went bankrupt? Well: 'Tis not mine to see trouble so far from my door. At worst the nation would cut me at most in half; I should still be as well off as before, and I shall draw a double income until any catastrophe arrives. A nation becomes bankrupt at most once a century; I shall have time to save.

And finally, is not the Comte de l'Estorade a peer of this July semi-republic? Is he not one of those pillars of royalty offered by the "people" to the King? How can I fear a friend at Court, a great financier, head of the Audit Department? I defy you to arraign my sanity! I am almost as good at sums as your citizen king.

Do you know what inspires a woman with all this arithmetic? Love, my dear!

Alas, the time has come to unfold the motives of my conduct, which baffled even your insight. I am to be married in a country village near Paris. I love and am loved. I love as much as a woman who knows love well can love, and I am loved as a woman ought to be by the man she adores.

Forgive me, Renée, for keeping this secret from you and everyone. If your friend eludes all spies and misleads curiosity, you must admit that my feeling for poor Macumer justified some dissimulation. Besides, de l'Estorade and you would have deafened me with remonstrances and plagued me with misgivings, and the facts might have seemed to support them. You know to what pitch my jealousy can go; all that would only have been useless torture. I was determined to carry out, on my own responsibility, what you will call my insane project, and to take counsel only with my head and heart—like a schoolgirl slipping away from watchful parents.

The man I love has nothing but thirty thousand francs' worth of debts, which I have paid. What a theme for comment here! You would have tried to make Gaston an adventurer; your husband would have set detectives on the dear boy. I preferred to sift him myself. He has been wooing me close on two years. I am twenty-seven, he is twenty-three—the difference, I admit, is huge on the wrong side. Another source of lamentation!

Lastly, he is a poet, who has lived by his trade—that is, on next to nothing. Being a poet, he has spent more time weaving day-dreams and basking in the sun than scribing in a garret. Practical people tar authors, artists, and all men who live by their brains with the same brush of inconstancy. Their nimble wit lays them open to the charge of equal agility in matters of the heart.

In spite of the debts, the age, and the poetry, an end is near to a heroic resistance of more than nine months, during which he has not been allowed even to kiss my hand; so ends the season of our sweet, pure love-making. This is not the surrender of a raw, curious girl as eight years ago; the gift is deliberate, and my lover awaits it with such loyal patience that, if I pleased, I could postpone the marriage for a year. There is no servility in this; love's slave he may be, but the heart is not slavish. Never have I seen a man of nobler feeling, or one whose tenderness was so rich in fancy and stamped with the impress of his soul. The art of love is his by heritage. A few words will tell his story.

My friend is called Marie Gaston. He is the illegitimate son of the beautiful Lady Brandon, whose sad fate you may know—she died broken-hearted, a victim to Lady Dudley's vengeance—a ghastly story of which the dear boy knows nothing. Marie Gaston was placed by his brother Louis in a boarding-school at Tours, where he remained until 1827. Louis sailed a few days later for foreign parts "to seek his fortune," as an old woman who played Providence to him said. This brother, turned sailor, used to write him fatherly letters and breathed a noble spirit; but a struggling life never allowed him to return. His last letter told Marie that he had been appointed Captain in the navy of some American republic and urged him to hope.

Alas, three years have passed, and my poor poet has heard nothing more. He loved his brother so dearly that he would have gone to look for him but for Daniel d'Arthez, the well-known author, who took a generous interest in Marie Gaston and prevented his mad impulse. Nor was this all; often he gave him a crust and a corner, as the poet puts it.

In truth, the poor lad was in terrible straits; he was innocent enough to believe—astonishing as it seems—that genius was the shortest road to fortune, and from 1828 to 1833 his aim was to make a name in letters. His life was a frightful tissue of toil and hardships, hope and despair. d'Arthez's good advice could not prevail against ambition, and his debts grew like a snowball. Still he was beginning to come into notice when I met him at Mme. d'Espard's. At first sight he inspired me, unconsciously to himself, with the most vivid sympathy. How did it happen that this virgin heart was left for me? He combines genius and shrewdness, passion and pride; women fear greatness without a weak side. How many victories were needed before Josephine could see the great Napoleon in the little Bonaparte she married.

Poor Gaston is innocent enough to think he knows the measure of my love! He simply has not the idea of it, but to you I must make it clear; this letter, Renée, is something like a last will. Weigh well what I say.

At this moment I am confident of being loved as perhaps no other woman is, nor have I a shadow of doubt as to the perfect happiness of our wedded life, to which I bring a feeling hitherto unknown to me. Yes, for the first time I know the delight of being swayed by passion. That which every woman seeks in love will be mine in marriage. As poor Felipe once adored me, so do I now adore Gaston. I have lost control of myself; I tremble before this boy as the Arab hero did before me. In a word, the balance of love is on my side, and this makes me timid. I am full of absurd terrors: afraid of being deserted, of growing old and ugly while Gaston keeps youth, afraid of falling short of his hopes!

And yet I believe I have in me sufficient devotion not only to keep alive the flame of his love in our solitary life, but even to make it burn stronger. If I am mistaken, if this idyl in hiding must end—what am I saying?—if I find Gaston's love one day less intense than the night before, be sure, Renée, I shall visit my failure only on myself; no blame shall attach to him. I tell you now it would mean my death. Not even children could make me live on those terms, for I know myself—I am the lover rather than the mother. Therefore, before taking this vow, I implore you, Renée, if this disaster befall me, to take the place of mother to my children; let them be my legacy to you! All I know of you—your blind attachment to duty, your rare gifts, your love of children, your affection for me—would help to make my death, I dare not say easy, at least less bitter.

This compact I have made with myself adds a vague terror to the solemnity of my marriage. For this reason I wish no one I know present; it will be performed in secret. Let my heart fail me if it will, but I shall not read anxiety in your dear eyes; I alone shall know that this marriage-contract may be my death warrant.

I will not again refer to this agreement between my present self and the self I am to be. I have confided it to you so you might know the full extent of your responsibilities. In marrying I retain full control of my property; and Gaston, while aware that I have enough to secure a comfortable life for both, is ignorant of its amount. Within twenty-four hours I shall dispose of it as I please; and to save him from a humiliating position, I shall have stock bringing him twelve thousand francs a year assigned. He will find this in his desk on the eve of our wedding. If he declined, I should break off the whole thing. I had to threaten rupture to get his permission to pay his debts.

This confession tires me. I shall finish it the day after tomorrow; I must spend tomorrow in the country.

October 20th.

I will tell you now the steps I have taken to ensure secrecy. My object has been to ward off every incitement to my ever-wakeful jealousy, in imitation of the Italian princess who, like a lioness carrying off her prey, retired to some Swiss town to devour it in peace. I confide my plans to you because I beg another favor: respect our solitude and never come uninvited.

Two years ago I bought a small property overlooking the ponds of Ville d'Avray, on the road to Versailles. It consists of twenty acres of meadow, the skirts of a wood, and a fine fruit garden. Below the meadows the land was excavated to make a lakelet of about three acres with a charming little island. The small valley is shut in by two graceful, thickly wooded slopes, where spring-water is led by channels to the park and then into the royal ponds, glimpsed in the distance. My park has been laid out with hedges, walls, and ha-has so that no point of view is lost.

A chalet has been built half-way up the hillside with a charming exposure: woods on either side and a grassy slope down to the lake. Externally it is a copy of the chalets admired by travelers from Sion to Brieg; the interior decorations match the best of the kind.

A hundred paces from this rustic dwelling stands a charming ornamental house communicating with it by a subterranean passage. This contains kitchen and servants' rooms, stables, and coach-houses; of all these brick buildings the facade alone is visible, graceful against shrubbery. Another building lodges the gardeners and masks the entrance to the orchards and kitchen-gardens.

The entrance gate is hidden in the wall dividing the park from the wood; the plantations, already well grown, will in two or three years completely hide the buildings, so that, except in winter, no trace of habitation will appear outside, save smoke on neighboring hills.

The surroundings of my chalet are modeled on the King's Garden at Versailles, with an outlook on my lake and island. The hills everywhere display abundant foliage—those splendid trees for which your new civil list has so well cared. My gardeners are to cultivate sweet-scented flowers only, so our home will be a fragrant emerald. The chalet, roof covered in wild vine, is embedded in climbing plants—hops, clematis, jasmine, azalea. It will be a sharp eye that descry our windows!

The chalet is solid, with heating and all conveniences of modern architecture. It contains a suite for Gaston and another for me. The ground floor has an ante-room, parlor, and dining room; above are three rooms for nurseries. I have five first-rate horses, a small light coupe, and a two-horse cabriolet. We are only a forty-minute drive from Paris; we can go to an opera after dinner and return the same night. The road passes under the shade of our green wall.

My servants—cook, coachman, groom, gardeners, and my maid—are respectable people whom I spent six months assembling; they will be overseen by my old Philippe. Confident of their loyalty, I have cultivated self-interest: wages are small but they will receive an annual New Year's present. They know that the slightest fault or a whisper of gossip may cost them a capital place. Lovers are indulgent to servants and therefore I reckon on my household.

All that was choice in my Rue du Bac house has been moved to the chalet. The Rembrandt hangs on the staircase, the Hobbema faces the Rubens in his study; the Titian Mary sent from Madrid adorns the boudoir. The fine furniture Felipe picked up looks well in the parlor, which the architect decorated tastefully. Everything at the chalet is charmingly simple with a simplicity that costs at least a hundred thousand francs. Our ground-floor rests on cellars of millstone embedded in concrete; it is almost completely buried in flowers and shrubs, deliciously cool without damp. To complete the picture, a fleet of white swans sail over my lake!

Oh, Renée, the silence in this valley would bring joy to the dead! One is awakened by birds or the breeze in the poplars. A little spring discovered while digging the foundations trickles down the hillside over silvery sand to the lake between banks of water-cress at the edge of the woods. I know nothing money can buy to equal it.

May not Gaston come to loathe this too perfect bliss? I shudder at its completeness; the ripest fruits harbor worms, the most gorgeous flowers attract insects. I have learned an unseen jealous power attacks happiness when it reaches perfection. That is the moral of your preaching, and you have been proved a prophet.

When I went the day before yesterday to see whether my last whim had been carried out, tears rose to my eyes; to my architect's surprise I passed his account for payment.

"But, madame," he exclaimed, "your man of business will refuse; it is three hundred thousand francs." My reply was only, "To be paid without question," with the bearing of a seventeenth-century Chaulieu.

"But," I added, "on one condition: no human being must hear from you of the park and buildings. Promise me on your honor not to breathe the proprietor's name."

Now can you understand my sudden journeys, my mysterious comings and goings? Do you know whither those beautiful things supposed to be sold have flown? Do you perceive the motive of my change of investment? Love, my dear, is a vast business, and they who would succeed in it should have no other. Henceforth I shall have no more trouble from money matters; I have taken all thorns out of my life and done my housekeeping with a vengeance, so as never to be troubled with it again, except during the ten minutes daily I shall devote to old Philippe. I have made a study of life and its sharp curves; death gave me harsh lessons. Now I want to turn all to account. My one occupation will be to please him and love him, to brighten with variety what to others is dull monotony.

Gaston is still in ignorance. At my request he, like myself, has taken up quarters at Ville d'Avray; tomorrow we start for the chalet. Our life will cost little; but if I told you the sum I set aside for my toilet, you would cry madness—and with reason. I intend to take as much trouble to make myself beautiful for him every day as other women do for society. My country dress, year in, year out, will cost twenty-four thousand francs, and most of this will not be for day costumes. As for him, he may wear a blouse! Don't suppose I will turn our life into an amorous duel and wear myself out in devices for feeding passion; all I want is a conscience free from reproach. Thirteen years still lie before me as a pretty woman, and I am determined to be loved on the last day of the thirteenth more fondly than on the morrow of our nuptials. This time no cutting words shall mar my grateful content. I will be servant where mistress thrived ill before.

Ah, Renée, if Gaston has sounded, as I have, the heights and depths of love, my happiness is assured! Nature at the chalet wears her fairest face. The woods are charming; each step opens some fresh vista of cool greenery that delights the soul with sweet thoughts. They breathe of love. If only this be not the gorgeous theatre dressed by my hand for my own martyrdom!

In two days I shall be Mme. Gaston. My God! is it fitting a Christian so to love a mortal?

"Well, at least you have the law with you," said my man of business, who is to be a witness; on discovering why my property was realized he exclaimed, "I am losing a client!"

And you, my sweetheart (whom I dare no longer call my loved one), may you not cry, "I am losing a sister?"

My sweet, address in future to Mme. Gaston, Poste Restante, Versailles. We shall send there every day for letters. I don't want to be known to the country people; we shall get provisions from Paris. In this way I hope to guard the secret of our lives. Nobody has been seen here during the years of preparing our retreat; the purchase was made in the troubled period after the revolution of July. The only person who has shown himself here is the architect; he alone is known and will not return.

Farewell. As I write I know not whether my heart is fuller of grief or joy. That proves, does it not, that the pain of losing you equals my love for Gaston?
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
My Dear Daniel,—I need two witnesses for my marriage. Come to-morrow evening for this purpose, bringing our worthy and honored friend, Joseph Bridau. She who is to be my wife, with an instinctive divination of my dearest wishes, has declared her intention of living far from the world in complete retirement. You, who have done so much to lighten my penury, have been left in ignorance of my love; but you will understand that absolute secrecy was essential.

This will explain why, for the last year, we have seen so little of each other. On the morrow of my wedding we shall be parted for a long time; but, Daniel, you are of stuff to understand me. Friendship can subsist in the absence of the friend. There may be times when I shall want you badly, but I shall not see you, at least not in my own house. Here again she has forestalled our wishes. She has sacrificed to me her intimacy with a friend of her childhood, who has been a sister to her. For her sake, then, I also must relinquish my comrade!

From this fact alone you will divine that ours is no mere passing fancy, but love, absolute, perfect, godlike; love based upon the fullest knowledge that can bind two hearts in sympathy. To me it is a perpetual spring of purest delight.

Yet nature allows of no happiness without alloy; and deep down, in the innermost recess of my heart, I am conscious of a lurking thought, not shared with her, the pang of which is for me alone. You have too often come to the help of my inveterate poverty to be ignorant how desperate matters were with me. Where should I have found courage to keep up the struggle of life, after seeing my hopes so often blighted, but for your cheering words, your tactful aid, and the knowledge of what you had come through? Briefly, my friend, she freed me from that crushing load of debt, which was no secret to you. She is wealthy, I am penniless. Many a time have I exclaimed, in one of my fits of idleness, "Oh for some great heiress to cast her eye on me!" And now, in presence of this reality, the boy's careless jest, the unscrupulous cynicism of the outcast, have alike vanished, leaving in their place only a bitter sense of humiliation, which not the most considerate tenderness on her part, nor my own assurance of her noble nature, can remove. Nay, what better proof of my love could there exist, for her or for myself, than this shame, from which I have not recoiled, even when powerless to overcome it? The fact remains that there is a point where, far from protecting, I am the protected.

This is my pain which I confide to you.

Except in this one particular, dear Daniel, my fondest dreams are more than realized. Fairest and noblest among women, such a bride might indeed raise a man to giddy heights of bliss. Her gentle ways are seasoned with wit, her love comes with an ever-fresh grace and charm; her mind is well informed and quick to understand; in person, she is fair and lovely, with a rounded slimness, as though Raphael and Rubens had conspired to create a woman! I do not know whether I could have worshiped with such fervor at the shrine of a dark beauty; a brunette always strikes me as an unfinished boy. She is a widow, childless, and twenty-seven years of age. Though brimful of life and energy, she has moods of dreamy melancholy. These rare gifts go with a proud aristocratic bearing; she has a fine presence.

She belongs to one of those old families who make a fetich of rank, yet loves me enough to ignore the misfortune of my birth. Our secret passion is now of long standing; we have made trial, each of the other, and find that in the matter of jealousy we are twin spirits; our thoughts are the reverberation of the same thunderclap. We both love for the first time, and this bewitching springtime has filled its days for us with all the images of delight that fancy can paint in laughing, sweet, or musing mood. Our path has been strewn with the flowers of tender imaginings. Each hour brought its own wealth, and when we parted, it was to put our thoughts in verse. Not for a moment did I harbor the idea of sullying the brightness of such a time by giving the rein to sensual passion, however it might chafe within. She was a widow and free; intuitively, she realized all the homage implied in this constant self-restraint, which often moved her to tears. Can you not read in this, my friend, a soul of noble temper? In mutual fear we shunned even the first kiss of love.

"We have each a wrong to reproach ourselves with," she said one day.

"Where is yours?" I asked.

"My marriage," was her reply.

Daniel, you are a giant among us and you love one of the most gifted women of the aristocracy, which has produced my Armande; what need to tell you more? Such an answer lays bare to you a woman's heart and all the happiness which is in store for your friend, MARIE GASTON.

L. MME. DE L'ESTORADE TO MME. DE MACUMER

Louise, can it be that, with all your knowledge of the deep-seated mischief wrought by the indulgence of passion, even within the heart of marriage, you are planning a life of wedded solitude? Having sacrificed your first husband in the course of a fashionable career, would you now fly to the desert to consume a second? What stores of misery you are laying up for yourself!

But I see from the way you have set about it that there is no going back. The man who has overcome your aversion to a second marriage must indeed possess some magic of mind and heart; and you can only be left to your illusions. But have you forgotten your former criticism on young men? Not one, you would say, but has visited haunts of shame, and has besmirched his purity with the filth of the streets. Where is the change, pray—in them or in you?

You are a lucky woman to be able to believe in happiness. I have not the courage to blame you for it, though the instinct of affection urges me to dissuade you from this marriage. Yes, a thousand times, yes, it is true that nature and society are at one in making war on absolute happiness, because such a condition is opposed to the laws of both; possibly, also, because Heaven is jealous of its privileges. My love for you forebodes some disaster to which all my penetration can give no definite form. I know neither whence nor from whom it will arise; but one need be no prophet to foretell that the mere weight of a boundless happiness will overpower you. Excess of joy is harder to bear than any amount of sorrow.

Against him I have not a word to say. You love him, and in all probability I have never seen him; but some idle day I hope you will send me a sketch, however slight, of this rare, fine animal.

If you see me so resigned and cheerful, it is because I am convinced that, once the honeymoon is over you will both with one accord, fall back into the common track. Some day, two years hence, when we are walking along this famous road, you will exclaim, "Why, there is the chalet which was to be my home for ever!" And you will laugh your dear old laugh, which shows all your pretty teeth!

I have said nothing yet to Louis; it would be too good an opening for his ridicule. I shall tell him simply that you are going to be married, and that you wish it kept secret. Unluckily, you need neither mother nor sister for your bridal evening. We are in October now; like a brave woman, you are grappling with winter first. If it were not a question of marriage, I should say you were taking the bull by the horns. In any case, you will have in me the most discreet and intelligent of friends. That mysterious region, known as the centre of Africa, has swallowed up many travelers, and you seem to me to be launching on an expedition which, in the domain of sentiment, corresponds to those where so many explorers have perished, whether in the sands or at the hands of natives. Your desert is, happily, only two leagues from Paris, so I can wish you quite cheerfully, "A safe journey and speedy return."

LI. THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE TO MME. MARIE GASTON 1835.

What has come to you, my dear? After a silence of two years, surely Renee has a right to feel anxious about Louise. So this is love! It brushes aside and scatters to the winds a friendship such as ours! You must admit that, devoted as I am to my children—more even perhaps than you to your Gaston—a mother's love has something expansive about it which does not allow it to steal from other affections, or interfere with the claims of friendship. I miss your letters, I long for a sight of your dear, sweet face. Oh! Louise, my heart has only conjecture to feed upon!

As regards ourselves, I will try and tell you everything as briefly as possible.

On reading your last letter but one, I find some stinging comments on our political situation. You mocked at us for keeping the post in the Audit Department, which, as well as the title of Count, Louis owed to the favor of Charles X. But I should like to know, please, how it would be possible out of an income of forty thousand livres, thirty thousand of which go with the entail, to give a suitable start in life to Athenais and my poor little beggar Rene. Was it not a duty to live on our salary and prudently allow the income of the estate to accumulate? In this way we shall, in twenty years, have put together about six hundred thousand francs, which will provide portions for my daughter and for Rene, whom I destine for the navy. The poor little chap will have an income of ten thousand livres, and perhaps we may contrive to leave him in cash enough to bring his portion up to the amount of his sister's.

When he is Captain, my beggar will be able to make a wealthy marriage, and take a position in society as good as his elder brother's.

These considerations of prudence determined the acceptance in our family of the new order of things. The new dynasty, as was natural, raised Louis to the Peerage and made him a grand officer of the Legion of Honor. The oath once taken, l'Estorade could not be half-hearted in his services, and he has since then made himself very useful in the Chamber. The position he has now attained is one in which he can rest upon his oars till the end of his days. He has a good deal of adroitness in business matters; and though he can hardly be called an orator, speaks pleasantly and fluently, which is all that is necessary in politics. His shrewdness and the extent of his information in all matters of government and administration are fully appreciated, and all parties consider him indispensable. I may tell you that he was recently offered an embassy, but I would not let him accept it. I am tied to Paris by the education of Armand and Athenais—who are now respectively thirteen and nearly eleven—and I don't intend leaving till little Rene has completed his, which is just beginning.

We could not have remained faithful to the elder branch of the dynasty and returned to our country life without allowing the education and prospects of the three children to suffer. A mother, my sweet, is hardly called on to be a Decius, especially at a time when the type is rare. In fifteen years from now, l'Estorade will be able to retire to La Crampade on a good pension, having found a place as referendary for Armand in the Audit Department.

As for Rene, the navy will doubtless make a diplomatist of him. The little rogue, at seven years old, has all the cunning of an old Cardinal.

Oh! Louise, I am indeed a happy mother. My children are an endless source of joy to me.

Senza brama sicura ricchezza.

Armand is a day scholar at Henry IV.'s school. I made up my mind he should have a public-school training, yet could not reconcile myself to the thought of parting with him; so I compromised, as the Duc d'Orleans did before he became—or in order that he might become—Louis Philippe. Every morning Lucas, the old servant whom you will remember, takes Armand to school in time for the first lesson, and brings him home again at half-past four. In the house we have a private tutor, an admirable scholar, who helps Armand with his work in the evenings, and calls him in the morning at the school hour. Lucas takes him some lunch during the play hour at midday. In this way I am with my boy at dinner and until he goes to bed at night, and I see him off in the morning.

Armand is the same charming little fellow, full of feeling and unselfish impulse, whom you loved; and his tutor is quite pleased with him. I still have Nais and the baby—two restless little mortals—but I am quite as much a child as they are. I could not bring myself to lose the darlings' sweet caresses. I could not live without the feeling that at any moment I can fly to Armand's bedside and watch his slumbers or snatch a kiss.

Yet home education is not without its drawbacks, to which I am fully alive. Society, like nature, is a jealous power, and will have not her rights encroached on, or her system set at naught. Thus, children who are brought up at home are exposed too early to the fire of the world; they see its passions and become at home with its subterfuges. The finer distinctions, which regulate the conduct of matured men and women, elude their perceptions, and they take feeling and passion for their guide instead of subordinating those to the code of society; whilst the gay trappings and tinsel which attract so much of the world's favor blind them to the importance of the more sober virtues. A child of fifteen with the assurance of a man of the world is a thing against all nature; at twenty-five he will be prematurely old, and his precocious knowledge only unfits him for the genuine study on which all solid ability must rest. Life in society is one long comedy, and those who take part in it, like other actors, reflect back impressions which never penetrate below the surface. A mother, therefore, who wishes not to part from her children, must resolutely determine that they shall not enter the gay world; she must have courage to resist their inclinations, as well as her own, and keep them in the background. Cornelia had to keep her jewels under lock and key. Shall I do less for the children who are all the world to me?

Now that I am thirty, the heat of the day is over, the hardest bit of the road lies behind me. In a few years I shall be an old woman, and the sense of duty done is an immense encouragement. It would almost seem as though my trio can read my thoughts and shape themselves accordingly. A mysterious bond of sympathy unites me to these children who have never left my side. If they knew the blank in my life which they have to fill, they could not be more lavish of the solace they bring.

Armand, who was dull and dreamy during his first three years at school, and caused me some uneasiness, has made a sudden start. Doubtless he realized, in a way most children never do, the aim of all this preparatory work, which is to sharpen the intelligence, to get them into habits of application and accustom them to that fundamental principle of all society—obedience. My dear, a few days ago I had the proud joy of seeing Armand crowned at the great interscholastic competition in the crowded Sorbonne, when your godson received the first prize for translation. At the school distribution he got two first prizes—one for verse, and one for an essay. I went quite white when his name was called out, and longed to shout aloud, "I am his mother!" Little Nais squeezed my hand till it hurt, if at such a moment it were possible to feel pain. Ah! Louise, a day like this might outweigh many a dream of love!

His brother's triumphs have spurred on little Rene, who wants to go to school too. Sometimes the three children make such a racket, shouting and rushing about the house, that I wonder how my head stands it. I am always with them; no one else, not even Mary, is allowed to take care of my children. But the calling of a mother, if taxing, has so many compensating joys! To see a child leave its play and run to hug one, out of the fulness of its heart, what could be sweeter?

Then it is only in being constantly with them that one can study their characters. It is the duty of a mother, and one which she can depute to no hired teacher, to decipher the tastes, temper, and natural aptitudes of her children from their infancy. All home-bred children are distinguished by ease of manner and tact, two acquired qualities which may go far to supply the lack of natural ability, whereas no natural ability can atone for the loss of this early training. I have already learned to discriminate this difference of tone in the men whom I meet in society, and to trace the hand of a woman in the formation of a young man's manners. How could any woman defraud her children of such a possession? You see what rewards attend the performance of my tasks!

Armand, I feel certain, will make an admirable judge, the most upright of public servants, the most devoted of deputies. And where would you find a sailor bolder, more adventurous, more astute than my Rene will be a few years hence? The little rascal has already an iron will, whatever he wants he manages to get; he will try a thousand circuitous ways to reach his end, and if not successful then, will devise a thousand and first. Where dear Armand quietly resigns himself and tries to get at the reason of things, Rene will storm, and strive, and puzzle, chattering all the time, till at last he finds some chink in the obstacle; if there is room for the blade of a knife to pass, his little carriage will ride through in triumph.

And Nais? Nais is so completely a second self that I can hardly realize her as distinct from my own flesh and blood. What a darling she is, and how I love to make a little lady of her, to dress her curly hair, tender thoughts mingling the while with every touch! I must have her happy; I shall only give her to the man who loves her and whom she loves. But, Heavens! when I let her put on her little ornaments, or pass a cherry-colored ribbon through her hair, or fasten the shoes on her tiny feet, a sickening thought comes over me. How can one order the destiny of a girl? Who can say that she will not love a scoundrel or some man who is indifferent to her? Tears often spring to my eyes as I watch her. This lovely creature, this flower, this rosebud which has blossomed in one's heart, to be handed over to a man who will tear it from the stem and leave it bare! Louise, it is you—you, who in two years have not written three words to tell me of your welfare—it is you who have recalled to my mind the terrible possibilities of marriage, so full of anguish for a mother wrapped up, as I am, in her child. Farewell now, for in truth you don't deserve my friendship, and I hardly know how to write. Oh! answer me, dear Louise.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
LII. MME. GASTON TO MME. DE L'ESTORADE The Chalet.

So, after two years' silence, you are curious why I have not written. My dear Renée, words, images, language fail to express my happiness. That we have strength to bear it sums up all I could say. It costs us no effort, for we are in perfect sympathy. The whole two years have known no discord, no jarring word between us, no difference in our slightest wishes. Not one day has failed to bear its own peculiar fruit; no moment has passed without being enriched by the play of fancy. We are so far from fearing monotony that our only anxiety is lest life be too short to contain all the poetic creations of a love as rich and varied as Nature herself. Of disappointment there is not a trace! We find more pleasure in being together than on the first day, and each hour discloses fresh reasons for our love. Every evening after dinner, as we stroll, we tell each other we must go and see what is doing in Paris, just as one might talk of going to Switzerland.

"Only think," Gaston will say, "such and such a boulevard is being made, the Madeleine is finished. We ought to see it. Let us go tomorrow."

And tomorrow comes; we are in no hurry to rise, we breakfast in our bedroom. Midday is on us and it is too hot; a siesta seems appropriate. Gaston looks at me and gazes as though my face were a picture, losing himself in contemplation, which, as you may suppose, is not one-sided. Tears rise to both our eyes as we think of our love and tremble. I am still the mistress, pretending, that is, to give less than I receive, and I revel in that deception. What can be sweeter to a woman than to see passion held in check by tenderness, and the man who is her master stayed, like a timid suitor, by a word from her within the limits she chooses?

You asked me to describe him; but, Renée, one cannot truly portrait the man we love. How could the heart be excluded? Besides, one of civilization's dire effects is to make the social man so unlike the natural man of strong feeling that sometimes not a single point of likeness remains. The gentleman who assumes the most graceful operatic poses, whispering sweet nothings by the fire, may be utterly destitute of those intimate charms a woman values. Conversely, an ugly, boorish, ill-dressed man may possess the genius of love and a perfect mastery of situations that bewilder us with our superficial graces. A man whose conventional aspect accords with his real nature, who, in the intimacy of wedded love, has an inborn grace neither given nor acquired—Greek art embodied it in statuary—the careless innocence of ancient poets which, even in frank undress, veils the soul with modesty—this is our ideal, linked with the universal harmony underlying things. To find this ideal in life haunts every woman's imagination—in Gaston I have found it.

Ah! dear, I did not know what love could be when joined to youth, talent, and beauty. Gaston has no affectations; he moves with instinctive, unstudied grace. When we walk alone in the woods, his arm round my waist, mine on his shoulder, our bodies fitting, heads touching, our step so even and gentle that passers-by at night take the vision for a single figure gliding over the graveled paths, like one of Homer's immortals. A like harmony exists in our desires, thoughts, words. More than once on evenings when a passing shower has left the leaves glistening and the grass a vivid green, we have ended our walk without a word, listening to the patter and feasting our eyes on the scarlet sunset, flaring on the hilltops or warming the gray of the trunks.

Beyond a doubt our thoughts then rose to Heaven in silent prayer, pleading for our happiness. At times a cry escaped us when some bend in the path opened fresh beauty. What words can tell how honey-sweet and full of meaning is a kiss half-timidly exchanged within the sanctuary of nature—it is as though God had created us to worship in this fashion.

And we return home, each more deeply in love than ever.

A love so passionate between old married people would outrage Parisian society; only in the heart of the woods, like lovers, can we give it full scope.

To particulars: Gaston is of middle height—the height proper to men of purpose. Neither stout nor thin, his figure is admirably made, ample in proportion, and every motion agile; he leaps a ditch with the easy grace of a wild animal. Whatever his attitude, he shows an instinctive sense of balance, rare in thoughtful men. Though dark, he has an extraordinarily fair complexion; his jet-black hair contrasts finely with the pale tones of neck and forehead. He has the tragic head of Louis XIII. His moustache and tuft have been allowed to grow, but I made him shave the whiskers and beard, which were becoming too common. An honorable poverty was his safeguard, leaving him unsoiled by the loose life that ruins many young men. His teeth are magnificent, and he has iron health. His keen blue eyes, full of tenderness for me, can flash like lightning at any rousing thought.

Like all men of powerful mind, he has an admirable temper; its evenness would surprise you, as it did me. I have heard many a woman's tale of home troubles; men's moods, depressions, the men who won't get old or age unpleasantly, who carry the rankling memory of youthful excess, whose veins run poison and whose eyes are never frankly happy—men who cloak suspicion under bad temper and make their women pay for an hour's peace by a morning of annoyance, who take vengeance on us for beauty they no longer have—all these horrors are unknown to youth. They are the penalty of unequal unions. Oh, my dear, whatever you do, don't marry Athénaïs to an old man!

But his smile—how I feast on it! A smile always present yet fresh through subtle fancy, a speaking smile storing thoughts of love and unspoken gratitude, linking present joys to past. Nothing is allowed to drop out of our common life. The smallest works of nature have become part of our joy. In these delightful woods everything is alive and eloquent of ourselves. An old mossy oak near the woodsman's house reminds us how we sat there, wearied under its shade, while Gaston taught me the story of the mosses at our feet, and, gradually ascending from science to science, we touched the very confines of creation.

There is something so kindred in our minds that they seem like two editions of the same book. You see what a literary tendency I have developed! We both have the habit, or gift, of looking at every subject broadly, taking in all its points of view, and the proof we constantly give ourselves of the singleness of our inward vision is an ever-new pleasure. We have come to see this community of mind as a pledge of love; if it failed, it would mean as much to us as a breach of fidelity in an ordinary home.

My life, full as it is of pleasures, would seem to you nevertheless extremely laborious. To begin with, my dear, you must know that Louise-Armande-Marie de Chaulieu does her own room. I could not bear that a hired menial, some woman or girl from outside, should be initiated—literary phrase—into the secrets of my bedroom. The veriest trifles connected with the worship of my heart partake of its sacred character. This is not jealousy; it is self-respect. Thus my room is done with all the care a young girl in love bestows on her person, and with the precision of an old maid. My dressing-room is no chaos; on the contrary, it is a charming boudoir. My keen eye foresees all contingencies. At whatever hour the lord and master enters, he will find nothing to distress, surprise, or shock him; he is greeted by flowers, scents, and everything that can please.

I rise at dawn, while he still sleeps, and without disturbing him pass into the dressing-room, where, profiting by my mother's experience, I remove the traces of sleep by bathing in cold water. During sleep the skin, being less active, does not perform its functions; it becomes warm and covered with a sticky mist. From a sponge-bath a woman issues ten years younger; perhaps this is the interpretation of the myth of Venus rising from the sea. The cold water restores to me the saucy charm of dawn, and, having combed and scented my hair and made a most fastidious toilette, I glide back, snake-like, so my master finds me, dainty as a spring morning, at his wakening. He is charmed with this freshness, as of a newly opened flower, without having the least idea how it is produced.

The regular toilet of the day is for my maid, and this takes place later in a larger room set aside for the purpose. As you may suppose, there is also a toilette for going to bed. Three times a day, or perhaps four, do I array myself for the delight of my husband; which, again, dear one, is suggestive of certain ancient myths.

But our life is not all play. We take great interest in our flowers, the hothouse beauties, and our trees. We give ourselves seriously to horticulture and embosom the chalet in flowers, of which we are passionately fond. Our lawns are always green, our shrubberies as well tended as those of a millionaire. Nothing, I assure you, can match the beauty of our walled garden. We are gluttons over our fruit and watch with tender interest our Montreuil peaches, our hotbeds, our laden trellises, and pyramidal pear-trees.

But lest these rural pursuits fail to satisfy my beloved's mind, I have advised him to finish, in the quiet of this retreat, some plays begun in his starving days, which are really very fine. This is the only kind of literary work that can be done in odd moments, for it requires long intervals of reflection and does not demand the elaborate pruning essential to a finished style. One cannot make task-work of dialogue; there must be biting touches, summings-up, and flashes of wit—the blossoms of the mind—which come rather by inspiration than reflection. This sort of intellectual sport suits me. I assist Gaston in his work, and so accompany him even in the boldest flights of his imagination. Do you see now how my winter evenings never drag?

Our servants have such an easy time that since our marriage we have never had to reprimand any of them. When questioned about us, they have had wit enough to invent an account, calling us the companion and secretary of a lady and gentleman supposed to be traveling. They never go out without permission, which they know will not be refused; they are contented, and see plainly it would be their own fault if things changed for the worse. The gardeners are allowed to sell the surplus of our fruits and vegetables. The dairymaid sells milk, cream, and butter on condition that the best is reserved for us. They take pleasure in their profits, and we are delighted with an abundance that no money in terrible Paris could procure, where a single fine peach costs a hundred francs.

All this has its meaning, my dear. I wish to fill the place of society to my husband; society is amusing, and his solitude must not pall. I believed myself jealous in the old days when I merely allowed myself to be loved; now I know real jealousy, the jealousy of the lover. A single indifferent glance unnerves me. From time to time I say, "Suppose he ceased to love me!" and a shudder runs through me. I tremble before him, as the Christian before his God.

Alas, Renée, I am still without a child. The time will surely come—it must—when our hermitage will need a father's and mother's care, when we shall both pine to see little frocks and pelisses, brown or golden heads leaping and running through our shrubberies and flowery paths. Oh, it is a cruel jest of Nature—a flowering tree that bears no fruit. The thought of your lovely children goes through me like a knife. My life has grown narrower while yours has expanded and shed its rays afar. Passion is essentially selfish, while motherhood widens the circle of feeling. How well I felt this when I read your kind, tender letter! To see you thus living in three hearts roused my envy. Yes, you are happy; you have had the wisdom to obey social laws, whilst I stand outside, an alien.

Children, dear, loving children, can alone console a woman for the loss of her beauty. I shall soon be thirty, and at that age the dirge within begins. What though I am still beautiful, the limits of my woman's reign are in sight. When they are reached, what then? I shall be forty before he is; I shall be old while he is still young. When this thought strikes, I lie at his feet for an hour, making him swear to tell me instantly if ever he feels his love diminishing.

But he is a child. He swears as though the suggestion were absurd, and he is so beautiful that—Renée, you understand—I believe him.

Good-bye, sweet one. Shall we ever again let years pass without writing? Happiness is a monotonous theme, and perhaps that is why, to souls who love, Dante seems greater in the Paradiso than in the Inferno. I am not Dante; I am only your friend, and I don't want to bore you. You can write, for in your children you have an ever-growing, ever-varying source of happiness, while mine... No more of this. A thousand loves.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
LIII. MME. DE L'ESTORADE TO MME. GASTON

My dear Louise,--I have read and re-read your letter; the more I enter
into its spirit the more convinced I am that it comes from a child, not a
woman. You are the same old Louise, forgetting what I used to tell you:
the passion of love properly belongs to a state of nature and has been
usurped by civilization. It is by its nature fleeting; society can do
little to change that primitive condition, and it is the effort of
noble minds to educate Cupid into manhood. As you yourself admit,
such love ceases to be natural.

Society abhors sterility; to replace the mere frenzy of nature with a
lasting sentiment it has invented the family, the durable basis of
organized life. For this it has sacrificed the individual: a married
man devotes his energy, power, and possessions to his wife. Who reaps
the benefit of his care? Is it not she who enjoys the comfort, luxury,
position and gaiety of home?

Oh, my sweet, you have taken the wrong turning again. To be adored is
the dream of youth; it cannot remain the aim of the mature woman,
the wife and mother. Vanity may be content in knowing she could be
adored; but if you would live the life of a wife and mother, return to
Paris. I repeat my warning: it is not misfortune you should dread so
much as happiness.

Listen: life consists in balanced movements; any excess gives rise to
a fever of the soul—either pain or pleasure—which nature cannot long
sustain. To make life one long excess is to choose sickness. You are
sick because you keep at the passion-temperature a feeling marriage
ought to steady and purify.

Yes, my dear, the glory of a home is its calm, intimacy and shared
responsibility, qualities the frivolous deride. The Duchesse de Sully
answered a remark about her husband's mistress: "What of that? I
represent the honor of the house." But you, Louise—more passionate
than tender—would be at once wife and mistress. With Heloise's soul and
Saint Theresa's passions, you let loose all impulses so long as they
have law's sanction; you degrade the marriage rite. The reproaches you
once levelled at me for seizing early happiness could be turned on you
for grasping at anything that serves your appetite. Must nature and
society be in bondage to your caprice? You are the old Louise: self-willed,
unchanged; you bring into your love the keenest and most mercenary of
calculations. Are you sure the price you demand for your toilettes is
not too high? Such precautions suggest mistrust.

If you knew the sweetness of a mother disciplining herself in kindness
and gentleness! My proud, self-sufficient temper dissolved into a soft
melancholy, now swallowed up by the delights of motherhood. If the
early hours were toilsome, the evening is tranquil. My dread is that the
day of your life should take the opposite course.

When I read your letter I prayed God to send you among us for a day, so
you might see what real family life is and learn those lasting joys
which are simple, natural and inexhaustible. But chance and your own
happiness have proved my arguments vain. I had hoped a few months of
honeymoon would restore you to reason, but there seems no limit to your
appetite; having killed a man who loved you, you will not cease until
you have killed love itself. Farewell, dear misguided friend. I am in
despair that the portrait of my happiness should have provoked only a
paean of selfishness. Yes, your love is selfish; you love Gaston less
for himself than for what he is to you.

LIV. MME. GASTON TO THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE May 20th.

Renee, calamity for me is doubt; certainty would be death.

The day before yesterday, after my first toilet, I looked everywhere
for Gaston before lunch and found his mare in a foam, the groom
scraping the mud off her legs.

"Who has put Fedelta in such a state?" I asked.

"Master," said the lad.

I saw Paris mud on the mare and the thought "He has been to Paris"
struck me like lightning. To go to Paris without telling me, at the hour
when I leave him alone—suspicion seized me. I tried to steady myself,
but when Gaston found me pale and fluttered he embraced me and carried
me to the parlor. I wept in my room while he waited two hours at the
door, patient as an angel, questioning me with tenderness. At last I
said I would see him when I could speak without tears.

He left in anger at my words, but returned; he asked what was wrong and
I could only point to the mud. He pledged he would explain tomorrow,
and I feigned satisfaction though unconvinced. All that day we spent
together and I realized how closely my life clung to him. When a man's
return fills you with trembling and delight, you live in him, not in
yourself. I hated that mare and thought mad thoughts—lame Gaston,
imprison him—because if love is not the cage, what else can hold a man
who wants to be free?

I asked, "Do I bore you?"

"What needless torture you give yourself!" he cried. "Never have I
loved you so deeply."

"If that is true, sell Fedelta," I said.

"Sell her, by all means!"

His answer crushed me; I thought it a covert taunt at my wealth. I
left him and that night the gardens seemed a precipice; such a night
ages a woman. Next morning I urged him to go to Paris alone; he read
me and went. I watched him ride away; when he vanished I sank into a
hell of suspicion. He left at seven and returned at eleven—he must
have spent hours in town. He came back radiant with a new whip, an
india-rubber whip with a gold handle and a scent-box—exactly the sort I
had wanted for a fortnight. I admired it, but then saw Verdier's name
on the handle; Gaston blushed like a child at being found out in a
trick. I made much of him and pretended all was forgotten.

May 25th.

Next morning I rode to Verdier's; they showed several whips and one
servant recognized mine. "We sold that yesterday to a young gentleman,"
he said. My heart tore during the journey back and the scene there; I
need not detail it. I returned and, trying to appear nonchalant,
confronted Gaston by the lake with the whip. He turned white, looked
for excuses, fumbled in vain. Jealousy had led to war between us; it
has neither sense nor decency.

I resolved to suffer in silence while watching until doubt was
resolved. There was a secret involving a woman. Is it a youthful
escapade? The question "what?" rose in letters of fire before me:
every sight, sound and word seemed to cry it. So I, who had been
devout in love, found myself dragged into this duel.

May 30th.

Since that day Gaston no longer works like a careless dilettante; he
now sets tasks and devotes hours to finishing his plays.

"He wants money!" a voice whispered. But why? We keep no secrets; his
study is open to me. He spends little; I know he once had thirty
thousand francs scattered in a drawer. At midnight, while he slept, I
went to see, and the drawer was empty.

That week I discovered he went to Sèvres to fetch and presumably tear
up letters; I followed him one ride to the post-office. He was
appalled to be discovered on horseback holding a letter; he paid the
postage and spurred Fedelta away. At the lodge gate I confronted him
and asked to read the letter in his hand. It was from Nathan, telling
Gaston a play of his had been accepted and enclosed a box-ticket. This
should have cleared my doubts, yet an inner fiend kept whispering,
"Where are the thirty thousand francs?" The thought came close to speech
but my dignity forbade asking; a woman would rather fling herself into
the lake.

I could have searched his drawer and found the missing money, but that
felt like seeking my own ruin. Still, the play's success—though the
credit went to Nathan—was in part ours. I saw the first night from a
stage box.

July 1st.

Gaston continues his work and Paris visits. Three plays accepted,
two more commissioned. I am lost in darkness. Does he hesitate to take
from me because of pride? If so, it is but a scruple—yet if he needs
such sums, perhaps to spend on a woman—then he deserts me for her. We
have one hundred thousand francs; if he feels ashamed to touch them, is
it because he loves another?

In short, I explored all possibilities and became convinced I have a
rival. I must see the unknown.

July 10th.

Light has come, and it is over with me. At thirty, in the perfection of
my beauty, I am betrayed—and for whom? A large-boned Englishwoman with
big feet and a thick waist! I will tell you the last days.

Worn out with suspicions fed by Gaston's silence, his need of money and
frequent Paris trips, I discovered that when in Paris Gaston visits a
house in the Rue de la Ville-l'Évêque where he keeps a mistress with
mysterious jealousy. The porter was surly but gave enough to end hope.
I went to Paris, took rooms opposite the house, and saw him enter the
courtyard on horseback. I soon saw that this Englishwoman, about
thirty-six and known as Mme. Gaston, was with him; worse, I saw him
walking in the Tuileries with two children, living images of Gaston,
handsomely dressed in English clothes. She is the children's mother.
This discovery was my deathblow.

I returned home almost lifeless, and the next day extracted from the
porter that Mme. Gaston was legally married.

July 15th.

My love for Gaston is stronger than ever since that morning; he seems
more in love. He spoke of consulting doctors and advised travel for
months. "Travel" pierced me. I arranged for an easy death and made my
will. You can come to me now; the prohibition is removed. Come and see
me die. If passion has not been ours in intensity, we have at least
been spared its venom. Farewell.

LV. THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE TO MME. GASTON July 16th.

My dear Louise,--I send this express before hastening to the chalet.
Take courage. Your last letter was so frantic I thought it right to
confide all to Louis; it was a question of saving you from yourself.
If our means were drastic, the result will satisfy you. I even set the
police to work, but the affair is kept among the prefect, ourselves,
and you.

In one word, Gaston is a jewel. The facts are these. His brother Louis
Gaston died in Calcutta while in the service of a mercantile company,
on the point of returning to France as a rich married man; he had
received a large fortune with his wife. For ten years he had worked to
send home enough to support his brother, concealing his trials in
letters. Then the great Halmer house failed; the widow was ruined and
the shock affected Louis' brain; he died in Bengal trying to realize the
remnants of his wife's property.

Louis had deposited with a banker three hundred thousand francs to go
to his brother, but the banker failed in the Halmer crash. Louis'
widow, the woman you took for your rival, arrived in Paris with two
children—your nephews—and an empty purse; her mother's jewels barely
paid for their passage. The instructions Louis had given the banker
enabled the widow to find Gaston's former home. As Gaston had
disappeared without leaving an address, Mme. Louis Gaston was directed
to d'Arthez, the only person who could help.

D'Arthez, ready to relieve her, had earlier been consulted by Louis on
the best means of transferring the money. He had written to Gaston to
tell him of the widow's needs and of Louis' intentions. Gaston, who
had saved fifty thousand francs out of the income you obligingly let
him take, hurried to Paris. He invested the fifty thousand in public
funds under the names of his two nephews, securing each about twelve
hundred francs a year. He furnished his sister-in-law's rooms and
promised her a quarterly allowance of three thousand francs. This
explains his rides to Paris and his dramatic labors, and the pleasure
he took in his play's success.

Mme. Gaston is therefore no rival and has every right to her name. A
man of Gaston's delicacy would keep the affair secret from you, knowing
your generous nature; he does not regard what you give him as his own.
D'Arthez read me Gaston's letter asking him to be a witness at the
marriage and confessing that except for poverty and indebtedness to
you his happiness would have been perfect. A sensitive soul makes such
scruples. Nothing is more natural than his wish to provide secretly for
his brother's widow, who had herself put aside one hundred thousand
francs for him. She is handsome, warm-hearted and well-bred, a mother;
I lost my heart to her when I saw her with one child in her arms and
the other dressed like a little lord. The children are everything in
her house.

Far from being angry with your husband, you should see in this fresh
reason to love him. I have met him and think him delightful; his soul
is in his face. If I were you, I would settle the widow and her
children at the chalet in a pretty cottage and adopt the boys.

Be at peace, dear soul, and plan this little surprise for Gaston.

LVI. MME. GASTON TO THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE

Ah, my dear friend, what can I say but Lafayette's cruel "It is too
late"? Oh, my life, what physician will restore it? My own hand struck
the deathblow; I was a will-o'-the-wisp, destined to perish before a
flame. My eyes rain torrents of tears—yet they must not fall when I am
with him. I fly to him and he seeks me. My despair is all within.
This torture Dante forgot to place in his Inferno. Come and see me die!
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
LVII. THE COMTESSE DE L'ESTORADE TO THE COMTE DE L'ESTORADE
THE CHALET,
August 7th.

My love,—Take the children to Provence without me; I remain with Louise, who has only a few days to live. I cannot leave either her or her husband, for whose sake I fear.

You know the scrap of a letter that sent me flying to Ville d'Avray, picking up the doctors on my way. Since then I haven't left my darling friend; it has been impossible to write, for I have sat up every night for a fortnight.

When I arrived I found her with Gaston, in full dress, beautiful, laughing, happy — a heroic falsehood! They were like two lovely children in their restored confidence. For a moment I was deceived, like Gaston, by the effrontery; but Louise pressed my hand, whispering:

"He must not know; I am dying."

An icy chill fell over me as I felt her burning hand and saw the red spots on her cheeks. I congratulated myself on leaving the doctors in the wood till they should be sent for.

"Leave us for a little," she said to Gaston. "Two women who have not met for five years have plenty of secrets to talk over, and Renee, I have no doubt, has things to confide in me."

Once alone she flung herself into my arms, unable to restrain her tears.

"Tell me about it," I said. "I've brought, in case of need, the best surgeon and physician from the hospital, and Bianchon; there are four in all."

"Ah!" she cried, "have them in at once if they can save me, if there is still time. The passion which hurried me to death now cries for life!"

"But what have you done to yourself?"

"In a few days I've brought myself to the last stage of consumption."

"But how?"

"I perspired at night, then ran out and lay by the lake in the dew. Gaston thinks I have a cold, and I am dying!"

"Send him to Paris; I will fetch the doctors myself," I said, rushing to where I had left them.

Alas! my love, after consultation, none of the doctors gave me hope; they all believe Louise will die with the fall of the leaves. Her constitution had aided the success of her plan. She had a predisposition to the complaint; and though, in the ordinary course, she might have lived a long time, a few days' folly has made the case desperate.

I cannot tell you what I felt hearing this sentence, based on such clear explanations. You know I have lived in Louise as much as in my own life. I was crushed and could not stir to escort to the door these harbingers of evil. I don't know how long I remained lost in bitter thoughts, tears running down my cheeks, when I was roused from my stupor by the words:

"So there is no hope for me!" in a clear, angelic voice.

It was Louise, with her hand on my shoulder. She made me get up, and carried me off to her small drawing-room. With a beseeching glance, she went on:

"Stay with me to the end; I won't have doleful faces round me. Above all, I must keep the truth from him. I know that I have the strength to do it. I am full of youth and spirit, and can die standing! For myself, I have no regrets. I am dying as I wished to die, still young and beautiful, in the perfection of my womanhood.

"As for him, I can see very well now that I should have made his life miserable. Passion has me in its grips, like a struggling fawn, impatient of the toils. My groundless jealousy has already wounded him sorely. When the day came that my suspicions met only indifference—which in the long run is the rightful meed of all jealousy—well, that would have been my death. I have had my share of life. There are people whose names on the muster-roll of the world show sixty years of service, and yet in all that time they have not had two years of real life, whilst my record of thirty is doubled by the intensity of my love.

"Thus for him, as well as for me, the close is a happy one. But between us, dear Renee, it is different. You lose a loving sister, and that is a loss which nothing can repair. You alone here have the right to mourn my death."

After a long pause, during which I could only see her through a mist of tears, she continued:

"The moral of my death is a cruel one. My dear doctor in petticoats was right; marriage cannot rest upon passion as its foundation, nor even upon love. How fine and noble is your life! keeping always to the one safe road, you give your husband an ever-growing affection; while the passionate eagerness with which I threw myself into wedded life was bound in nature to diminish. Twice have I gone astray, and twice has Death stretched forth his bony hand to strike my happiness. The first time, he robbed me of the noblest and most devoted of men; now it is my turn, the grinning monster tears me from the arms of my poet husband, with all his beauty and his grace.

"Yet I would not complain. Have I not known in turn two men, each the very pattern of nobility—one in mind, the other in outward form? In Felipe, the soul dominated and transformed the body; in Gaston, one could not say which was supreme—heart, mind, or grace of form. I die adored—what more could I wish for? Time, perhaps, in which to draw near the God of whom I may have too little thought. My spirit will take its flight towards Him, full of love, and with the prayer that some day, in the world above, He will unite me once more to the two who made a heaven of my life below. Without them, paradise would be a desert to me.

"To others, my example would be fatal, for mine was no common lot. To meet a Felipe or a Gaston is more than mortals can expect, and therefore the doctrine of society in regard to marriage accords with the natural law. Woman is weak, and in marrying she ought to make an entire sacrifice of her will to the man who, in return, should lay his selfishness at her feet. The stir which women of late years have created by their whining and insubordination is ridiculous, and only shows how well we deserve the epithet of children, bestowed by philosophers on our sex."

She continued talking thus in the gentle voice you know so well, uttering the gravest truths prettily, until Gaston entered, bringing with him his sister-in-law, the two children, and the English nurse, whom, at Louise's request, he had fetched from Paris.

"Here are the pretty instruments of my torture," she said, as her nephews approached. "Was not the mistake excusable? What a wonderful likeness to their uncle!"

She was most friendly to Mme. Gaston the elder and begged that she would look upon the chalet as her home; in short, she played the hostess to her in her best de Chaulieu manner, in which no one can rival her.

I wrote at once to the Duc and Duchesse de Chaulieu, the Duc de Rhetore, and the Duc de Lenoncourt-Givry, as well as to Madeleine. It was time. Next day, Louise, worn out with so much exertion, was unable to go out; indeed, she only got up for dinner. In the course of the evening, Madeleine de Lenoncourt, her two brothers, and her mother arrived. The coolness which Louise's second marriage had caused between herself and her family disappeared. Every day since that evening, Louise's father and both her brothers have ridden over in the morning, and the two duchesses spend all their evenings at the chalet. Death unites as well as separates; it silences all paltry feeling.

Louise is perfection in her charm, her grace, her good sense, her wit, and her tenderness. She has retained to the last that perfect tact for which she has been so famous, and she lavishes on us the treasures of her brilliant mind, which made her one of the queens of Paris.

"I should like to look well even in my coffin," she said with her matchless smile, as she lay down on the bed where she was to linger for a fortnight.

Her room has nothing of the sick-chamber in it; medicines, ointments, the whole apparatus of nursing, is carefully concealed.

"Is not my deathbed pretty!" she said to the Sevres priest who came to confess her.

We gloated over her like misers. All this anxiety, and the terrible truths which dawned on him, have prepared Gaston for the worst. He is full of courage, but the blow has gone home. It would not surprise me to see him follow his wife in the natural course. Yesterday, as we were walking round the lake, he said to me:

"I must be a father to those two children," and he pointed to his sister-in-law, who was taking the boys for a walk. "But though I shall do nothing to hasten my end, I want your promise that you will be a second mother to them, and will persuade your husband to accept the office of guardian, which I shall depute to him in conjunction with my sister-in-law."

He said this quite simply, like a man who knows he is not long for this world. He has smiles on his face to meet Louise's, and it is only I whom he does not deceive. He is a mate for her in courage.

Louise has expressed a wish to see her godson, but I am not sorry he should be in Provence; she might want to remember him generously, and I should be in a great difficulty.

Good-bye, my love.

August 25th (her birthday).

Yesterday evening Louise was delirious for a short time; but her delirium was the prettiest babbling, which shows that even the madness of gifted people is not that of fools or nobodies. In a mere thread of a voice she sang some Italian airs from I Puritani, La Sonnambula, Moise, while we stood round the bed in silence. Not one of us, not even the Duc de Rhetore, had dry eyes, so clear was it to us all that her soul was in this fashion passing from us. She could no longer see us! Yet she was there still in the charm of the faint melody, with its sweetness not of this earth.

During the night the death agony began. It is now seven in the morning, and I have just myself raised her from bed. Some flicker of strength revived; she wished to sit by her window, and asked for Gaston's hand. And then, my love, the sweetest spirit whom we shall ever see on this earth departed, leaving us the empty shell.

The last sacrament had been administered the evening before, unknown to Gaston, who was taking a snatch of sleep during this agonizing ceremony; and after she was moved to the window, she asked me to read her the De Profundis in French, while she was thus face to face with the lovely scene, which was her handiwork. She repeated the words after me to herself, and pressed the hands of her husband, who knelt on the other side of the chair.

August 26th.

My heart is broken. I have just seen her in her winding-sheet; her face is quite pale now with purple shadows. Oh! I want my children! my children! Bring me my children!

THE END

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Arthez, Daniel d' — A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; The Member for Arcis; The Secrets of a Princess.

Beauseant, Marquise de — The Deserted Woman.

Bianchon, Horace — appears in Father Goriot; The Atheist's Mass; Cesar Birotteau; The Commission in Lunacy; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Bachelor's Establishment; The Secrets of a Princess; The Government Clerks; Pierrette; A Study of Woman; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; Honorine; The Seamy Side of History; The Magic Skin; A Second Home; A Prince of Bohemia; The Muse of the Department; The Imaginary Mistress; The Middle Classes; Cousin Betty; The Country Parson. In addition, M. Bianchon narrated Another Study of Woman and La Grande Bretèche.

Bridau, Joseph — The Purse; A Bachelor's Establishment; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Start in Life; Modeste Mignon; Another Study of Woman; Pierre Grassou; Cousin Betty; The Member for Arcis.

Bruel, Claudine Chaffaroux, Madame du — A Bachelor's Establishment; A Prince of Bohemia; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; The Middle Classes.

Canalis, Constant-Cyr-Melchior, Baron de — A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Modeste Mignon; The Magic Skin; Another Study of Woman; A Start in Life; Beatrix; The Unconscious Humorists; The Member for Arcis.

Chaulieu, Henri, Duc de — Modeste Mignon; A Bachelor's Establishment; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; The Thirteen.

Chaulieu, Eleonore, Duchesse de — Eugenie Grandet.

Dudley, Lady Arabella — The Lily of the Valley; The Ball at Sceaux; The Magic Skin; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve.

Esgrignon, Victurnien, Comte (then Marquis d') — Jealousies of a Country Town; A Man of Business; The Secrets of a Princess; Cousin Betty.

Espard, Jeanne-Clementine-Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d' — The Commission in Lunacy; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; Another Study of Woman; The Gondreville Mystery; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve; Beatrix.

Estorade, Louis, Chevalier, then Vicomte and Comte de l' — The Member for Arcis.

Estorade, Madame de l' — The Member for Arcis; Ursule Mirouet.

Estorade, Armand de l' — The Member for Arcis.

Gaston, Louis — La Grenadiere.

Gaston, Marie — La Grenadiere; The Member for Arcis.

Givry — The Lily of the Valley; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life.

Lenoncourt-Givry, Duc de — Cousin Betty; The Member for Arcis.

Lenoncourt-Givry, Duchesse de — The Lily of the Valley; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life.

Marsay, Henri de — The Thirteen; The Unconscious Humorists; Another Study of Woman; The Lily of the Valley; Father Goriot; Jealousies of a Country Town; Ursule Mirouet; A Marriage Settlement; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; The Ball at Sceaux; Modeste Mignon; The Secrets of a Princess; The Gondreville Mystery; A Daughter of Eve.

Mary — The Member for Arcis.

Maucombe, Comte de — Lost Illusions.

Maufrigneuse, Duchesse de — The Secrets of a Princess; Modeste Mignon; Jealousies of a Country Town; The Muse of the Department; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; Another Study of Woman; The Gondreville Mystery; The Member for Arcis.

Mirbel, Madame de — Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; The Secrets of a Princess.

Nathan, Raoul — Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve; The Seamy Side of History; The Muse of the Department; A Prince of Bohemia; A Man of Business; The Unconscious Humorists.

Rhetore, Duc Alphonse de — A Bachelor's Establishment; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan's Life; Albert Savarus; The Member for Arcis.

Sallenauve, Comtesse de — The Member for Arcis.

Stael-Holstein (Anne-Louise-Germaine Necker), Baronne de — The Chouans; Louis Lambert.

Talleyrand-Perigord, Charles-Maurice de — The Chouans; The Gondreville Mystery; The Thirteen; Gaudissart II.

Vandenesse, Comte Felix de — The Lily of the Valley; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Cesar Birotteau; A Start in Life; The Marriage Settlement; The Secrets of a Princess; Another Study of Woman; The Gondreville Mystery; A Daughter of Eve.

Victorine — Massimilla Doni; Lost Illusions; Gaudissart II.

End of Project Gutenberg's Letters of Two Brides, by Honoré de Balzac
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################