“HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!”

This exclamation came from a lawyer’s clerk called in French offices a gutter-jumper—a messenger—who at that moment was eating a piece of dry bread. He pulled off a crumb to make into a bullet and fired it gleefully through the open window. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the pane after hitting the hat of a stranger crossing the courtyard of the house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maître Derville, attorney-at-law.

“Come, Simonnin, don’t play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!” said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

The lawyer’s messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who in every office is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk. His errands and billets-doux keep him employed carrying writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in habits and to the pettifogger by fate: ruthless, unbroken, impudent, greedy, and idle. Yet almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on a fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

“If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?” asked Simonnin, like a schoolboy who has caught his master out, and he went on eating, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb, one leg raised on the toe of his shoe.

“What trick can we play on that cove?” said the third clerk, Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing while the fourth clerk engrossed an appeal, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

Then he improvised mockingly: “But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth—when he resumed the reins of Government—understood the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!” (Write it at full length, Desroches—‘when he resumed the reins of Government, understood’—what did that old nincompoop ever understand?) “And his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents all their unsold estates…for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in—” Stop, said Godeschal to the three copying clerks; “that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.—Well,” he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue to fold the stamped paper, “if you want to play him a trick, tell him the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!”

And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating—“given in—Are you ready?”

“Yes,” cried the three writers.

The appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy went on together.

“Given in—Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our i’s and cross our t’s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages.”

“By Jingo!” repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

“What! have you written by Jingo?” cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices with an expression both stern and humorous.

“Why, yes,” said Desroches, leaning across his neighbor’s copy, “he has written, ‘We must dot our i’s’ and spelt it by Gingo!”

All the clerks shouted with laughter.

“Why! Monsieur Hure, you take ‘By Jingo’ for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!” exclaimed Simonnin.

“Scratch it cleanly out,” said the head clerk. “If the judge who taxes the bill were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write an appeal without thought. It is the ‘Shoulder arms!’ of the law.”

“Given in—in?” asked Godeschal. “Tell me when, Boucard.”

“June 1814,” replied the head clerk, without looking up.

A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions. Five clerks with hungry teeth, bright eyes, and curly heads lifted their noses toward the door, crying all together, “Come in!”

Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of broutilles and went on drawing out the bill of costs.

The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk’s cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended with that of the overheated stove and the odor of old papers. The floor was covered with mud and snow brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid where the head clerk worked; against its back was the second clerk’s table. The second clerk was at Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

The only decoration consisted of huge yellow posters announcing seizures, sales, settlements, final or interim judgments—all the glory of a lawyer’s office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, each division crammed with bundles of papers with tickets on red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with yellowed cardboard boxes bearing the names of important clients whose cases were juicily stewing. The dirty window-panes admitted little daylight. Indeed, there are few Paris offices where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in February; they are left to natural neglect—every one comes and no one stays; no one has personal interest in this routine scene—neither attorney, nor counsel, nor clerks. To the youths it is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down with such scrupulous care that some offices still contain boxes of remainders, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Châtelet.

So in this dark room, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to clients—something that made an attorney’s office one of the most hideous marts of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops where rags show the last end of our festivities—an attorney’s office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But perhaps in these places the drama in a man’s soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers.

“Where is my penknife?”

“I am eating my breakfast.”

“You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy.”

“Silence, gentlemen!”

These exclamations were uttered as the old client shut the door with the humility that disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he looked vainly for amenity on the indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping for a civil answer from this boy of all work.

“Monsieur, is your master at home?”

The pert messenger made no reply but patted his ear, as much as to say, “I am deaf.”

“What do you want, sir?” asked Godeschal, swallowing a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot to the level of his eyes.

“This is the fifth time I have called,” replied the victim. “I wish to speak to M. Derville.”

“On business?”

“Yes, but I can explain it to no one but—”

“M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can—”

The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog in a strange kitchen expecting a kick. By the grace of their profession, lawyers’ clerks fear no thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not provide many chairs. The inferior client, kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then wastes no time—which, as an old lawyer said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

“Monsieur,” said the old man, “as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up.”

Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt his chocolate, rose from his cane arm-chair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

“It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning.” The stranger looked at the head clerk bewildered and remained motionless. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance and to the oddities indecision gives rise to in “parties,” went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paid no further heed to the old man.

“I will come again to-night,” said the stranger at length, with that tenacious hope peculiar to the unfortunate to catch humanity at fault.

The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

“What do you think of that for a cracked pot?” said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

“He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again,” said a clerk.

“He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay,” said the head clerk.

“No, he is a retired concierge,” said Godeschal.

“I bet you he is a nobleman,” cried Boucard.

“I bet you he has been a porter,” retorted Godeschal. “Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body’s. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch.”

“He may be of noble birth and yet have pulled the door-latch,” cried Desroches. “It has been known!”

“No,” Boucard insisted, amid laughter, “I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic.”

“I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier,” said Godeschal.

“Done with you,” answered Boucard.

“Monsieur! Monsieur!” shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

“What are you at now, Simonnin?” asked Boucard.

“I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know.”

All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

“What can we say to him?” cried Godeschal.

“Leave it to me,” replied Boucard.

The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

“Monsieur,” said Boucard, “will you be kind enough to leave your name so that M. Derville may know—”

“Chabert.”

“The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?” asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

“The same, monsieur,” replied the good man with antique simplicity. And he went away.

“Whew!”

“Done brown!”

“Poof!”

“Oh!”

“Boum!”

“Ting-a-ring-ting!”

“Sold again!”

“Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying,” said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

There was a storm of cat-calls and exclamations that words can hardly represent.

“Which theatre shall we go to?”

“To the opera,” cried the head clerk.

“In the first place,” said Godeschal, “I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui.”

“Madame Saqui is not the play.”

“What is a play?” replied Godeschal. “First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen—”

“But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!” cried Simonnin.

“To be seen for money,” Godeschal added.

“But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective,” said Desroches.

“But do listen to me!”

“You are talking nonsense, my dear boy,” said Boucard.

“Is Curtius’ a play?” said Godeschal.

“No,” said the head clerk, “it is a collection of figures—but it is a spectacle.”

“I bet you a hundred francs to a sou,” Godeschal resumed, “that Curtius’ Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy.”

“And so on, and so forth!” said Simonnin.

“You mind I don’t box your ears!” said Godeschal.

The clerks shrugged.

“Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us,” he said, dropping his argument, drowned in the laughter of the others. “On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients.”

“Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow,” said Boucard. “To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber—judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!”

“If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?” said Desroches, seeing that as more conclusive than Godeschal’s logic.

“Since nothing is settled,” said Boucard, “let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Français and see Talma in ‘Nero.’ Simonnin may go to the pit.”

And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

“Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen (in words),” said Godeschal. “Ready?”

“Yes,” replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers trapped in paper cages.

“And we hope that my lords on the Bench—” the extemporizing clerk went on. “Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself.”

“Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines,” said Boucard.

“We hope,” Godeschal began again after reading through, “that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth—”

“Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn’t you like a glass of water?” said the little messenger.

“That imp of a boy!” said Boucard. “Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides.”

“Here set forth,” Godeschal went on. “Add in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse (at full length) de Grandlieu.”

“What!” cried the chief, “are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor—a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and notes; you may keep that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of ‘inasmuch,’ and go to the Courts myself.”

This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, “Those were good times.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maître Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter said Monsieur Derville had not yet come in, but the old man insisted he had an appointment and was shown upstairs to the lawyer’s rooms, where the head clerk was arranging papers for the next day’s cases. The clerk explained that Derville chose the night for studying his cases when silence favored his thought; the young lawyer then earned much by this disciplined, spare life.

The visitor sat motionless. When Derville arrived in evening dress, he and his clerk were struck by the man’s appearance. Colonel Chabert was dry and lean, his forehead partly hidden by a wig, his eyes as if shrouded by a film, his face pale and livid like the dead. A tight black silk stock, the shadow of his hat, and the stillness of his pose added to the corpse-like impression. When he removed his hat in greeting his wig stuck to the greasy leather lining and was pulled away, exposing a horrible scar across the skull from nape to over the right eye—an old wound that made the sight of him shocking.

“Monsieur,” said Derville, “to whom have I the honor of speaking?”

“To Colonel Chabert.”

“Which?”

“He who was killed at Eylau,” answered the stranger.

Taken for mad, the man nevertheless asked to confide his position to the lawyer. Derville, used to odd clients, dismissed his clerk and asked him to be brief. The Colonel then related his story with a mixture of lucidity and the hesitation of one who had been disbelieved.

He commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau and had been instrumental in Murat’s charge. In action he had been struck by a Russian officer with a blow that split his skull; he fell from his horse and was trampled as regiments passed over him. Surgeons sent by the Emperor reported him dead and a certificate of death was made out. Yet he had not perished. He supposed that tetanus or catalepsy had left him apparently lifeless when he was stripped and thrown into a common grave in the hurry of battle.

Later, at Stuttgart, an old quartermaster named Boutin—whom the Colonel had once saved—explained how his horse had fallen over him, shielding him from trampling and bullets and leaving a space that saved his head. When he came to, he found himself buried among the dead. By feeling about he found an arm that served as a lever and worked his way through the piled bodies until he saw daylight through snow. His head was cut open but coagulated blood and skin may have plugged it enough to keep him alive. Fainting and reviving, he shouted until he was finally dug out by a woman and her husband, who took him to their hovel. He remained for six months between life and death, speechless or delirious, then was admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

He lacked the documents that would prove his identity—the surgeon Sparchmann’s deposition and the notarial declaration he had made at Heilsberg—because war had separated him from them. Wandering afterward beggared and scorned, he had tried to obtain from German authorities the proofs that might restore him to France and to his rights, but had been laughed at, regarded as mad, even locked up at Stuttgart for two years. On his release with ten thalers and a key of the fields he set out to find his wife and his fortune.

He knew Derville was lawyer to the Countess Ferraud, who was indeed his wife. Chabert said that after many fruitless attempts to interest lawyers he had come to Derville because he hoped to get help to obtain the German documents. He described his misery: naked when he left the hospital, wandering, begging, enduring insults, living with the hope that Boutin might find his wife. Boutin had set out for Paris to inform Madame Chabert but never reached her; he was killed at Waterloo. The Colonel arrived in Paris without money, ill and naked; after a stay at the Hôtel-Dieu he sought his house in the Rue du Mont-Blanc, only to find that it had been sold and pulled down. An old lawyer who had held his affairs was dead; his successor laughed at him when he claimed to be Chabert. He watched his wife’s house, sometimes seeing her carriage flash by after a ball; she had married M. Ferraud, had two children, and enjoyed an income of thirty thousand francs, which he asserted belonged to him. He had written her letters—she had received some—yet she gave him nothing.

Derville listened, sometimes interrupting. The Colonel’s narrative was plain and full of detail; the lawyer was struck by his candor and gratitude when Derville told him he would begin inquiries and make advances. The old man, so long repudiated, was overwhelmed when the young lawyer offered to try to obtain the Heilsberg papers and to give him five francs a day meanwhile. Derville spoke with practical reserve: the case would be exceptional and difficult, might go before three tribunals, and success was not certain even if the German documents could be obtained. He added a letter to his notary authorizing fifty francs every ten days to the Colonel’s order, to be recorded as a loan rather than alms, and urged him not to accept charity.

Chabert was deeply moved. For ten years repudiated by his wife and by society, he could hardly believe the small assistance was real. Gratitude choked him; he thanked Derville warmly, saying that after the Emperor the lawyer would be the man to whom he owed most. Derville accompanied him to the stairs with a light, and, once outside by a street lamp, the Colonel took the two gold pieces out of the letter and looked at them. “I may smoke cigars!” he said to himself.

Before leaving, Derville confided to his head clerk Boucard that the tale might cost him five and twenty louis; if robbed, he would not regret the money, for he had seen “the most consummate actor of the day.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
About three months after this interview, in Derville’s room at night, the notary who had been asked to advance half-pay on Derville’s account to his eccentric client came to consult the attorney and begged him to refund the six hundred francs the old soldier had received.

“Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?” laughed the notary—a young man named Crottat, who had just bought the office in which he had been head clerk; his chief had fled after a disastrous bankruptcy.

“I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair,” replied Derville. “My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty-five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism.”

As he spoke, Derville noticed the papers Boucard had laid out and the stamps on a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French posts.

“Ah ha! here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!” He opened the letter; it was in German.

“Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately,” Derville said, half opening his study door and giving the letter to his head clerk.

The Berlin notary to whom Derville had written answered that the documents requested would arrive in a few days. They were regular, duly witnessed, and legally stamped. Most witnesses still lived at Eylau, and the woman who had saved Comte Chabert’s life was in a suburb of Heilsberg.

“This looks like business,” cried Derville when Boucard gave him the substance of the letter. “But look here, my boy,” he added, addressing the notary, “I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin—?”

“We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin,” interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

“Well, was it not that ill-used man who absconded with eight hundred thousand francs of his clients’ money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert’s estate? I fancy I have seen that in the Ferraud file.”

“Yes,” said Crottat. “I was third clerk then; I copied and studied those papers. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They married without settlement; thus, all property was common. The personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will leaving one-quarter to the hospitals, the State to take another quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and attorneys rushed the division. At the settlement the man then governing France restored to the widow by decree the portion that would have gone to the treasury.”

“So Comte Chabert’s personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?”

“Consequently so it was, old fellow!” said Crottat. “You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices.”

The first receipt Derville had from the Colonel listed his address: Faubourg Saint-Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, lodging with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard turned dairyman, Vergniaud. Derville’s coachman refused to drive on the rutted unpaved street, so the lawyer went on foot. At the end of the lane, between two battered stone gate-posts, a crossbeam bore the painted sign: “Vergniaud, dairyman,” with eggs and a cow. The gate opened onto a yard and a hovel-like house—recently built but haphazardly assembled from demolition scraps. A shutter from a shop-sign read “Fancy Goods.” Windows were mismatched; the ground floor sat unevenly; a puddle of waste lay between gate and door. The back wall supported rabbit hutches; the cowhouse and poultry yard flanked the yard; roofs were roughly thatched.

The yard showed the haste of preparing Paris’s daily meal. Tin cans and cream pots lay by the dairy; rags dried on strings; a placid cart-horse stood by the stable; a goat nibbled a starved vine; a cat sat on cream jars; fowls scattered; a watch-dog barked.

“And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!” Derville thought, surveying the squalor.

Three little boys played in the yard. Derville asked if M. Chabert lived there; the children neither answered nor understood. Provoked, he abused them with the careless raillery of a young man; they laughed. Then the Colonel emerged from a low room near the dairy, smoking a short clay pipe and wearing a greasy cap, calm and military in demeanor. Calling to the boys, “Silence in the ranks!” he restored order.

“Why did you not write to me?” he asked Derville. “Go round by the cowhouse; the path’s paved there.” He led the way, avoiding the manure heap, and Derville followed, hopping on dry spots.

Chabert’s room was a bedroom barely fit for habitation: a straw bed with fragments of carpet for cover, an earthen floor, saltpeter-stained cracked walls with a reed mat nailed on the damp side. His box-coat hung on a nail; two pairs of boots lay in a corner; there was no linen. On the worm-eaten table lay the Bulletins de la Grande Armée reprinted by Plancher. Despite the squalor, Chabert’s countenance was calm; Derville saw a gleam of hope in his face.

“Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?” he asked, setting a stool for the lawyer.

“But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!” Derville blurted, by instinctive distrust and the experience of lawyers who see many obscure tragedies.

“To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship,” the soldier said, looking sharply at the man of law. “I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace.”

Derville had the lawyer’s reflex to suspect waste of funds. “Here,” he thought, “is a man who has, of course, spent my money in satisfying a trooper’s three virtues—play, wine, and women!” He did not press the Colonel for an account, thinking it indecorous; instead he asked why Chabert would not come to Paris, where he might live better at similar cost.

“Why,” said the Colonel, “the good folks with whom I live fed me gratis for a year. How could I leave them when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an Egyptian—”

“An Egyptian?”

“We give that name to troopers who went to Egypt, of which I was one. We who came back are brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We shared draughts in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read.”

“He might have lodged you better for your money,” Derville said.

“Bah! his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor, you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune... However, it does very well.”

“Colonel, to-morrow or the next day I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!”

“Curse the money! To think I haven’t got any!” he cried, flinging his pipe to the ground. The gesture was natural, almost generous; every smoker would have forgiven it.

“Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business,” Derville said as they walked in the sunshine.

“To me,” the soldier replied, “it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before Eylau.”

“Things are not done so in the legal world,” said Derville. “You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but that must be proved judicially to persons who will deny it. Your papers will be disputed; ten or twelve preliminary inquiries will arise. Every question will be appealed, giving rise to costly suits that will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Opponents will demand inquiries, perhaps a commission to Prussia. And even if justice recognizes you at once, can we know how questions arising from the bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud will be decided?

“In your case the point is unknown to the Code; it will be treated as a question of equity, like delicate jury questions in social cases. You had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. Judges might pronounce against the marriage where family ties are weakest and confirm the other where they are stronger. Would it be becoming for you, at your age and circumstances, to insist on resuming rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you—two important persons who might influence the Bench. So the case may be prolonged; you will have time for bitter regrets.”

“And my fortune?”

“Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?”

“Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?”

“My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter to hospitals.”

“That is true.”

“Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation and a sale to give that quarter away. Your wife likely omitted to include ready money or jewels in the valuation and possibly undervalued the furniture. The valuation stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife, having a right to half, bought in much of it; she got something out of it, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand. Then, because you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored by decree the residue which would have gone to the Exchequer. So now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more—and minus costs.”

“And you call that justice!” the Colonel exclaimed.

“Why, certainly—”

“A pretty kind of justice!”

“So it is, my dear Colonel. You see what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor.”

“But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void—”

“I agree. But every case can be heard. I think a compromise would be best for both. You would gain more than you can prove a right to.”

“That would be to sell my wife!”

“With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who would suit you better and make you happier. I propose going to see the Comtesse Ferraud to sound her; but I would not act without warning you.”

“Let us go together.”

“What, just as you are?” said the lawyer. “No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot.”

“Can I possibly gain it?”

“On every count,” replied Derville. “But you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid. If the bench should allow you a maintenance—that is, a sum advanced on your prospects—they will not do so till you have proved your identity as Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor.”

“To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that,” the Colonel said simply.

“Well, until then,” Derville went on, “you will have to engage pleaders, copy documents, keep the law’s underlings working, and support yourself. The preliminary inquiries will, roughly, cost ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you—I am crushed by interest on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you? Where will you find it?”

Tears gathered in the veteran’s faded eyes and rolled down his cheeks. The outlook discouraged him: the legal and social world weighed like a nightmare.

“I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!” he cried. “I will call out: ‘I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!’—The statue—he—he will know me.”

“And you will find yourself in Charenton.”

At that dread name the soldier collapsed. Will and resolve failed. Military justice, swift and final, was the only justice he knew, and the labyrinth of paperwork and expense seemed unbearable. He thought it might be easier to remain poor, to beg, or to enlist as a trooper.

His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his health; grief had undermined him. But Derville saw the signs of despair and said, “Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests.”

“Do what you will,” said Chabert.

“Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death.”

“Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?”

“That is not my view,” Derville said. “We will try a friendly suit to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud’s intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt get a pension.”

“Proceed then,” said Chabert. “I put myself entirely in your hands.”

“I will send you a power of attorney to sign,” said Derville. “Good-bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me.”

Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer’s hand and stood with his back against the wall, lacking energy to follow him except with his eyes. Like all men ignorant of legal matters, he was frightened by the unforeseen struggle.

During their interview a man in the street had watched. Now he approached Derville: an old man in a blue waistcoat, otter-skin cap, tanned face—Louis Vergniaud.

“Asking your pardon, sir,” he said, taking Derville by the arm, “if I take the liberty of speaking to you. I fancied you were a friend of our General’s.”

“And what then?” replied Derville. “But who are you?”

“I am Louis Vergniaud,” he answered. “I have a few words to say to you.”

“So you are the man who lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?”

“Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read—a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under—Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much—bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it’s neighbors’ fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome. But he has hurt our feelings.”

“He?”

“Yes, sir. To be plain with you, I took a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I had bills to meet—Do you know Grados, sir?”

“I have not time to hear your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you.”

“He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried. He saw we had not a sou to meet the bills. The old soldier saved up all you gave him, waited for the bill, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and I went without because he had no tobacco—Now he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it—No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you—he said you were a good sort—to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt. Well, it’s just the other way; the old man is running us into debt—and hurt our feelings! He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too! On my word, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back.”

Derville looked at the dairyman and at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the rabbits, the children.

“On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!” he thought.

“All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure.”

“And will that be soon?”

“Why, yes.”

“Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!” Vergniaud’s face brightened.

“Now,” Derville thought as he got into his cab, “let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but...” He fell into one of those political meditations lawyers use to contrive plans and guess an adversary’s secrets.

A brief survey of the Ferraud position is necessary to understand Derville’s cleverness.

Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor of the old Parlement who emigrated during the Reign of Terror and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He returned under the Consulate, remained persistently faithful to Louis XVIII., and belonged to the Faubourg Saint-Germain circle which resisted Napoleon’s blandishments. The Emperor had tried to win him, promising restitution of title and estates, a place in the ministry or the Senate.

At the time of Comte Chabert’s supposed death, M. Ferraud was about twenty-six, without fortune, of pleasing appearance, and had been adopted by the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Madame la Comtesse Chabert had turned her share of the old fortune to good account; after eighteen months of widowhood she had about forty thousand francs a year and was an acceptable match. Her marriage to the young Count pleased both vanity and passion and made her a real fine lady. When the Restoration came, Comte Ferraud’s political advancement was not rapid—he saw the need to wait. He had gained two tracts of forest and an estate under earlier orders, so his position improved. Though a Councillor of State and Director-General, he regarded his present place as the first step of his career.

Wholly occupied by ambition, he attached to himself as secretary a ruined attorney, Delbecq, a clever man versed in legal resources, to manage his private affairs. Delbecq, hoping for place by his master’s influence, wisely cared for the Count’s fortune. The Countess, with women’s tact, understood Delbecq’s motives and managed him so that she used him to increase her private fortune. She had promised to secure him a modest provincial judgeship if he devoted himself to her interests. A place, independent of ministry changes, would allow him to marry advantageously and rise politically; so Delbecq became her abject slave. He had trebled her capital, aided by her lack of scruple. The Count’s emoluments she spent on housekeeping to reinvest the dividends; Delbecq, thinking her thirst for money natural, enabled her schemes. She buried other motives deep. There lay the turning-point of the story.

At the start of 1818 the Restoration seemed stable; Parisian society changed. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud, young and handsome, took her place at Court and in high society, rich and married to an admired Count sure to be a minister. Yet in this triumph she suffered a moral canker. There are feelings women guess despite men’s care to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud began to regret his marriage. The Countess had known that her first husband lived and had ignored him; later, thinking him dead, she chose to marry for rank and fortune. Perhaps Ferraud judged her education unfit for his schemes; a remark he made about Talleyrand’s marriage showed the Countess that if he had been free he would never have married her. Such repentance is intolerable to a woman. She had feared her first husband’s return and had resolved to make herself so rich that her second marriage could not be dissolved. Now he had reappeared; she could not explain why the struggle she feared had not yet begun. Maybe he was mad or in Charenton; she did not confide in Delbecq or the police, fearing exposure. Many women live with such secret fears and form a callus, able still to enjoy life.

“There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud’s position,” thought Derville as his cab halted at the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. “How is it that he, so rich and a favorite of the King, is not yet a peer of France? Perhaps the King wishes to keep the peerage rare. If his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer transferred to him? At any rate, that will be a good bogey to frighten the Countess.” He had thus touched the Countess’ hidden wound.

She received him in a pretty winter dining-room at breakfast, playing with a monkey tethered to a pole. She was in an elegant wrapper; her hair, carelessly pinned, gave her an arch look. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table; rare plants grew in china jars. Seeing Chabert’s wife in luxury while the old soldier lived with a dairyman among beasts, Derville thought, “A pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat.”

“Good-morning, Monsieur Derville,” she said, giving the monkey some coffee.

“Madame,” he replied sharply, for her light tone jarred on him. “I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter.”

“I am so grieved, M. le Comte is away—”

“I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count.”

“Then I will send for Delbecq,” she said.

“He would be of no use to you, clever as he is,” Derville replied. “Listen; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!”

“Is it by telling me such nonsense that you think you can make me grave?” she laughed; but Derville’s fixed gaze silenced her.

“Madame,” he said with cold solemnity, “you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point.”

“What then do you wish to discuss with me?” she asked.

“Neither the Colonel nor yourself,” he said. “Nor need I allude to briefs clever advocates might draw with these facts or to the advantage they may derive from letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second.”

“It is false,” she cried violently. “I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if someone pretends to be the Colonel, he is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. I shudder to think of it. Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly right to turn away all the Chaberts who ever came, as I shall all who may come.”

“Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease,” Derville said coolly, enjoying the way the Countess’ anger might lead her to betray herself. “Well, then, we must fight it out,” he thought, hatching a plan to entrap her.

“The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities—”

“Oh, as to securities—that it certainly did not.”

“Then you received the letter,” said Derville, smiling. “You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight Justice—”

The Countess colored and then paled, hiding her face. She shook off the shame and retorted with impertinent hauteur, “Since you are the so-called Chabert’s attorney, be so good as to—”

“Madame,” Derville interrupted, “I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert’s. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?—But you are not listening.”

“Nay, speak on, monsieur,” she said more graciously.

“Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are circumstances here which might turn public opinion strongly against you.”

“But, monsieur,” she protested, “even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert.”

“It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take,” Derville answered. “If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other an old man crushed by sorrows, will the judges contravene the law? Your marriage to Col. Chabert has priority and legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger I warn you against.”

“And who is he?”

“Comte Ferraud.”

“Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children—”

“Do not talk of such absurdities,” interrupted Derville, “to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant M. Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annul your union, and I am sure he adores you; but if someone were to tell him his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal—”

“He would defend me, monsieur.”

“No, madame.”

“What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?”

“That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King.”

The Countess turned pale.

“A hit!” Derville thought. “I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel’s case is won.” He pressed on aloud: “Besides, madame, he would feel less remorse because a man covered with glory—a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor—is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife’s returning to him—”

“Enough, enough, monsieur!” she cried. “I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?”

“Compromise,” said Derville.

“Does he still love me?” she asked.

“Well, I do not think he can do otherwise.”

At that reply a flash of hope shone in her eyes: perhaps she could use the Colonel’s affection as a lever.

“I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to terms,” Derville said, taking leave.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
A week after Derville’s two visits, on a fine June morning the husband and wife, separated by an almost supernatural chance, set out from opposite ends of Paris to meet in the lawyer’s office engaged by both. The supplies Derville had advanced enabled Colonel Chabert to dress suitably; the dead man arrived in a decent cab, wearing a wig that suited him, blue cloth and white linen, and the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor under his waistcoat. Resuming the habits of wealth had restored his soldierly bearing; his grave, mysterious face reflected happiness and hope and seemed revived. He no longer resembled the Chabert of the old box-coat; a passerby would have recognized one of the noble wrecks of the old army.

When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville’s office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a simple dress arranged to show how youthful her figure was; a drawn bonnet lined with pink framed her face and softened its outlines.

The office remained unchanged. Simonnin, breakfasting by the open window, stared at the blue sky above the courtyard.

“Ah, ha! Who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?” cried the little clerk.

“The chief is a great magician,” said Godeschal.

“Then there is no trick to play on him this time?” asked Desroches.

“His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud,” said Boucard.

“Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?” Godeschal joked.

“Here she is,” answered Simonnin.

Chabert pinched the gutter-jumper’s ear, to the clerks’ amusement. He was in Derville’s private room when the Countess entered the office.

“I have placed you apart,” Derville told her, “not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert. If, however, you wish it—”

“It is an attention for which I am obliged to you.”

Derville had drawn up a memorandum of an agreement for them to discuss. He read aloud: the preamble named Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, living in Paris, and Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the said Comte Chabert; it proposed that she and Chabert acknowledge, before witnesses and notaries, that the person designated is her first husband, and that Chabert would assert his rights only under certain circumstances—failure to carry out the conditions of their secret agreement. Chabert would accept a friendly suit to annul his certificate of death and dissolve the marriage. By a subsequent clause she pledged to secure Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock, to revert to her at his death.

“But it is much too dear!” exclaimed the Countess.

“Can you compromise it?” asked Derville.

“Possibly. But what do you want, madame?”

“I want—I will not have a lawsuit. I want—”

“You want him to remain dead?” interrupted Derville.

“Monsieur,” said the Countess, “if twenty-four thousand francs are necessary, we will go to law—”

“Yes, we will go to law,” said the Colonel in a deep voice, opening the door and standing before his wife, one hand in his waistcoat, the other hanging by his side—an attitude made ominous by his adventure.

“It is he,” the Countess thought.

“Too dear!” the old soldier exclaimed. “I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you—you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved—”

“But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!” cried the Countess with feigned astonishment.

“Indeed!” said the old man with intense irony. “Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais-Royal—”

The Countess turned pale. Chabert paused, touched by the pain he caused the woman he had once loved; but her venomous glance made him continue abruptly: “You were with La—”

“Allow me, Monsieur Derville,” said the Countess. “You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things.”

She left. Derville rushed after her, but she had already gone.

Back in his private room, the Colonel paced in a towering rage.

“In those times a man took his wife where he chose,” he said. “But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted appearances. She has no heart.”

“Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch,” Derville warned. “Besides you might miss! A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife. Let me set things straight; go now. Take care of yourself; she may set a trap and shut you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you.”

The Colonel obeyed and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly descended the dark staircase, crushed by the most cruel blow—his wife's recognition of him without acknowledgment of identity—when he heard a rustle on the lowest landing and she stood before him.

“Come, monsieur,” she said, taking his arm with a familiar gesture. Her action and recovered gracious tone allayed his wrath, and he allowed her to lead him to the carriage.

“Well, get in!” she said when the footman let down the step.

As if by magic he found himself sitting beside her.

“Where to?” asked the servant.

“To Groslay,” she answered.

They drove across Paris. “Monsieur,” said the Countess in a voice trembling with a rare emotion—this single word expressed reproach and pardon, hope and despair, a question and an answer—“I knew you at once.”

“Rosine,” said the old soldier, “those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes.”

Two hot tears rolled onto her hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

“Could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false?” she asked. “If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in privacy. You will forgive me, I hope. I received your letters, but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing unrecognizable; after obtaining Napoleon’s signature to my second marriage contract, I believed some swindler wanted to make a fool of me. To avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud and family ties, I took precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right?”

“Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot,” he admitted. “But where are we going?” noticing they had reached La Chapelle.

“To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There we will consider the steps to be taken. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? Let us preserve our dignity. You still love me,” she said sadly, “but have I not been authorized to form other ties? A secret voice bids me trust your kindness. Be judge and party to the suit. I love M. Ferraud. I believed I had a right to love him. I do not blush to confess it; I do not disgrace us. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother.”

The Colonel waved her silence away; for a long stretch they rode without speaking. Chabert imagined the two little ones before him.

“Rosine.”

“Monsieur?”

“The dead are very wrong to come to life again.”

“Oh, monsieur, no! Do not think me ungrateful. You find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter.”

“Rosine,” he said in a softened tone, “I no longer feel resentment. We will forget. I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me.”

The Countess gave him a look of deep gratitude that overwhelmed him. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion; his whole reward was the assurance he had made her happy.

“My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested,” she said.

They conversed, recalling their former life and the Empire, and she lent a tinge of melancholy that kept the talk serious. She revived his love without awakening desire and allowed him to see her mental resources while guiding him to moderate his pleasure to paternal affection. He found in her a Countess of the Restoration.

By a cross-road they reached the entrance to a large park in the valley between Margency and Groslay. The Countess had a delightful house prepared for his stay. Misfortune had made the Colonel more helpful and good; though trusting, he could not help asking, “Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?”

“Yes,” she said, “if I found Colonel Chabert among Derville’s clients.”

Her plausible reply calmed his slight remaining suspicion. For three days she was charming, with tender attentions and unfailing sweetness, apparently anxious to wipe out his sufferings and earn forgiveness for wrongs she confessed to have caused innocently. She delighted in showing the charms he liked while assuming a kind of melancholy to appeal to his feelings and take possession of his mind.

She did not yet know precisely what to do with him but meant to annihilate him socially. On the third evening uneasy at the results of her maneuvers, she finished a letter to Delbecq, instructing him to demand the deeds from Derville in her name, copy them, and come to Groslay. She had scarcely finished when she heard the Colonel’s step; uneasy at her absence, he came to look for her.

“Alas! I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable...”

“Why, what is the matter?” he asked.

“Nothing,” she replied, and went to speak privately to her maid, sending her to Paris to deliver the letter to Delbecq and bring it back as soon as read. The Countess then sat on a bench in sight to be joined by the Colonel. He hurried and sat beside her.

“Rosine,” he said, “what is the matter with you?”

She did not answer. The June evening was calm and lovely; distant children’s voices added sweetness. “You do not answer me?” he said.

“My husband—” the Countess broke off, blushed, and asked, “What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?”

“Call him your husband,” Chabert replied gently. “Is he not the father of your children?”

“If he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out I came here alone with a stranger, what am I to say? Decide my fate; I am resigned.”

“My dear,” said the Colonel, taking her hands, “I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness—”

“That is impossible!” she cried, convulsively. “Remember you would have to renounce your identity, in an authenticated form.”

“Is not my word enough?” he asked. The demand for authentication pierced him and aroused distrust; he looked at her in a way that made her color.

A child cried in the distance. “Jules, leave your sister in peace,” the Countess called. “What, are your children here?” he asked.

“Yes, but I told them not to trouble you.”

He understood the delicacy and took her hand to kiss it. “But let them come,” he said. Two children ran up, complaining and holding out their hands. The Countess, no longer restraining her tears, cried, “Poor little things! I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother’s heart cannot be divided; I want them.”

“Are you making mamma cry?” Jules asked, glaring at the Colonel.

“Silence, Jules!” said the mother. The children stood speechless, curious.

“If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything...” she cried.

“That is decisive,” said Chabert. “I must return underground. I had told myself so already.”

“Can I accept such a sacrifice?” she asked. “To sign that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an impostor, to live a lie every hour! But for my children I would have fled with you to the other end of the world.”

“Cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but tobacco and the Constitutionnel.”

The Countess melted; a contest of generosity ensued between them, and the soldier prevailed. One evening, bewitched by the domestic picture, he resolved to remain dead, and, no longer frightened by the authentication of a deed, asked what he could do to secure the family’s happiness.

“Do exactly as you like,” she said. “I declare I will have nothing to do with this affair.”

Delbecq had arrived days before and, following the Countess’s orders, had gained the Colonel’s confidence. The next morning Chabert went with the intendant to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had a notary draw up an affidavit. After hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

“Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!” he cried.

“Indeed, monsieur,” said Delbecq, “I should advise you to get at least thirty thousand francs a year. Madame would pay.”

The insulted Colonel slapped the scoundrel’s cheeks twice and rushed off. Stung and confused, he returned to the park at Groslay by a gap in the fence and sat to meditate in a little room under a gazebo that commanded the road to Saint-Leu. The Countess, in the upper room, did not hear him approach. She and Delbecq discussed how to get him into Charenton if necessary.

The Colonel, recovering youthful elasticity, leaped the haha and stood before Delbecq, giving him two fine slaps. His rage spent, he no longer felt vigorous enough to leap back; he had seen the truth in its nakedness. The Countess’ words and Delbecq’s reply had exposed the conspiracy intended to entrap him. The care shown him had been bait for a snare. The revelation brought back all his suffering; he felt disgust for life and indecision.

At last he went up into the kiosque and found his wife seated, calm but shuddering slightly when she saw him. He stood with folded arms, face pale, brow stern.

“Madame,” he said after a moment’s gaze that compelled her to blush, “I do not curse you—I scorn you. I can thank the chance that divided us. I do not desire revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of sunshine. Farewell!”

The Countess threw herself at his feet and would have detained him by his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust: “Do not touch me!”

Her expression when he left showed an infernal perspicacity: she knew she might live in peace on his word and contempt.

Chabert disappeared. The dairyman failed and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel perhaps took up some similar industry, or fell from ledge to ledge, lost in the mire of rags of Paris.

Six months later, Derville, hearing nothing of Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed they had compromised through some other lawyer. One morning he summed the advances he had made to Chabert with costs, and asked the Countess to claim the amount from M. le Comte Chabert, assuming she knew where to find her first husband.

The next day Comte Ferraud’s man of business, newly appointed President of the County Court, sent Derville a note:

“Monsieur,—Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he came forward under false pretences. Yours, etc., DELBECQ.”

“One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half,” cried Derville. “They don’t deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand-franc notes!”

Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader employed in the Police Court. By chance he entered Court Number 6 just as the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months’ imprisonment as a vagabond, followed by confinement in the Mendicity House of Detention. On hearing the name, Derville recognized the delinquent between two gendarmes as his false Colonel Chabert.

The old soldier sat placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In rags and misery, his face still showed noble pride and a stoical eye. When a man falls into the hands of justice, he becomes a mere matter of law.

Taken back to the lock-up to be removed with the other vagabonds at the bar, Derville used his privilege to follow him. The lock-up was a dark, malodorous ante-room where the wretches of the city gathered. The sight justified, in the eyes of any observer, the desperation that pushes many to suicide.

Colonel Chabert sat among men in the livery of misery, silent or speaking low, while three gendarmes paced. “Do you recognize me?” Derville asked, standing before him.

“Yes, sir,” said Chabert, rising.

“If you are an honest man,” Derville whispered, “how could you remain in my debt?”

The old soldier blushed as a young girl accused of a clandestine affair might.

“What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?” Derville cried.

“Paid me?” said Derville. “She wrote to me that you were a swindler.”

Chabert cast up his eyes in sublime horror and imprecation, as if calling heaven to witness to the new subterfuge.

“Monsieur,” he said in a calm, husky voice, “get the gendarmes to allow me into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored.”

On Derville’s word the sergeant allowed it, and Hyacinthe wrote a few lines addressed to the Comtesse Ferraud.

“Send her that,” said the soldier, “and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is no less sincere here,” and he laid his hand on his heart. “But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all.”

Derville went away. Returning to his office, he sent Godeschal to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert’s lawyer.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now an attorney, went to Bicetre with Derville, whom he had succeeded. On the avenue from the highroad they saw, beneath an elm, one of those old, broken paupers who have earned among beggars the Marshal’s staff by living at Bicetre as poor women live at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor lodged in the infirmary for the aged, sat on a corner-stone and seemed to concentrate all his intelligence on a common operation among pensioners: drying his snuffy pocket-handkerchief in the sun, perhaps to save washing it. He had an attractive countenance and wore the reddish cloth wrapper-coat the workhouse gives its inmates, a horrid livery.

“I say, Derville,” Godeschal observed, “look at that old fellow. Isn’t he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And he is alive, perhaps happy.”

Derville peered at the poor man through his eyeglass and, with a little exclamation, answered:

“That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama. Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?”

“Yes; she is clever and agreeable, but rather too pious,” said Godeschal.

“That Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. If he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I remember the tiger’s glare she shot at him then.”

This remark piqued Godeschal’s curiosity, and Derville related the story that follows.

Two days later, on Monday morning as they returned to Paris, they looked again at Bicetre and Derville proposed visiting Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick he amused himself drawing lines in the sand. On closer look they perceived he had breakfasted elsewhere than at Bicetre.

“Good-morning, Colonel Chabert,” said Derville.

“Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe,” replied the veteran. “I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7,” he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child. “Are you going to visit the man condemned to death? He is not married! He is very lucky!”

“Poor fellow!” said Godeschal. “Would you like something to buy snuff?”

With the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand; each stranger gave him a twenty-franc piece. He thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

“Brave troopers!”

He ported arms, pretended to take aim, and shouted with a smile:

“Fire! both arms! Vive Napoleon!” Then he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

“The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish,” said Derville.

“Childish! he?” said another old pauper looking on. “Why, there are days you would better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day—what can you expect?—he has had his Monday treat. He was here, monsieur, as long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, ‘Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.’—‘I was too young to be there,’ said Hyacinthe. ‘But I was at Jena.’ And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions.”

“What a destiny!” exclaimed Derville. “Taken from the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe. Do you know, my dear fellow,” he went on after a pause, “there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world—the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? They wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man seeks the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the intercessor; the priest purifies, repairs, and reconciles. But we lawyers see the same evil feelings repeated; nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers that can never be cleansed.

“How many things I have learned in my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year. I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, women working on a husband’s love to make him idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage tastes that must bring it to the grave so the child of an illicit affection may benefit. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have witnessed crimes against which justice is impotent. All the horrors romancers suppose they invent are below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris.”

“I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches’ office,” replied Godeschal.

PARIS, February–March 1832.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy:

Bonaparte, Napoleon
  The Vendetta; The Gondreville Mystery; Domestic Peace; The Seamy Side of History; A Woman of Thirty

Crottat, Alexandre
  Cesar Birotteau; A Start in Life; A Woman of Thirty; Cousin Pons

Derville
  Gobseck; A Start in Life; The Gondreville Mystery; Father Goriot; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

Desroches (son)
  A Bachelor’s Establishment; A Start in Life; A Woman of Thirty; The Commission in Lunacy; The Government Clerks; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Firm of Nucingen; A Man of Business; The Middle Classes

Ferraud, Comtesse
  The Government Clerks

Godeschal, Francois-Claude-Marie
  A Bachelor’s Establishment; A Start in Life; The Commission in Lunacy; The Middle Classes; Cousin Pons

Grandlieu, Vicomtesse de
  Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Gobseck

Louis XVIII., Louis-Stanislas-Xavier
  The Chouans; The Seamy Side of History; The Gondreville Mystery; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Ball at Sceaux; The Lily of the Valley; The Government Clerks

Murat, Joachim, Prince
  The Vendetta; The Gondreville Mystery; Domestic Peace; The Country Doctor

Navarreins, Duc de
  A Bachelor’s Establishment; The Muse of the Department; The Thirteen; Jealousies of a Country Town; The Peasantry; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Country Parson; The Magic Skin; The Gondreville Mystery; The Secrets of a Princess; Cousin Betty

Vergniaud, Louis
  The Vendetta
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################