GOBSECK

By Honore De Balzac

Translated By Ellen Marriage


                           DEDICATION

                 To M. le Baron Barchou de Penhoen.

Among all the pupils of the Oratorian school at Vendome, we are, I
think, the only two who have afterwards met in mid-career of a
life of letters—we who once were cultivating Philosophy when by
rights we should have been minding our De viris. When we met, you
were engaged upon your noble works on German philosophy, and I
upon this study. So neither of us has missed his vocation; and
you, when you see your name here, will feel, no doubt, as much
pleasure as he who inscribes his work to you.—Your old
schoolfellow,

     1840                                            De Balzac.


GOBSECK

It was one o’clock in the morning, during the winter of 1829–30, but in
the Vicomtesse de Grandlieu’s salon two persons stayed on who did not
belong to her family circle. A young and good-looking man heard the
clock strike, and took his leave. When the courtyard echoed with the
sound of a departing carriage, the Vicomtesse looked up, saw that no one
was present save her brother and a family friend finishing their game of
piquet, and went across to her daughter. The girl, standing by the
chimney-piece, apparently examining a transparent fire-screen, was
listening to the sounds from the courtyard in a way that justified
certain maternal fears.

“Camille,” said the Vicomtesse, “if you continue to behave to young
Comte de Restaud as you have done this evening, you will oblige me to
see no more of him here. Listen, child, and if you have any confidence
in my love, let me guide you in life. At seventeen one cannot judge of
past or future, nor of certain social considerations. I have only one
thing to say to you. M. de Restaud has a mother, a mother who would
waste millions of francs; a woman of no birth, a Mlle. Goriot; people
talked a good deal about her at one time. She behaved so badly to her
own father, that she certainly does not deserve to have so good a son.
The young Count adores her, and maintains her in her position with
dutifulness worthy of all praise, and he is extremely good to his
brother and sister.—But however admirable his behavior may be,” the
Vicomtesse added with a shrewd expression, “so long as his mother lives,
any family would take alarm at the idea of intrusting a daughter’s
fortune and future to young Restaud.”

“I overheard a word now and again in your talk with Mlle. de Grandlieu,”
cried the family friend, “and it made me anxious to put in a word
of my own.—I have won, M. le Comte,” he added, turning to his opponent.
“I shall throw you over and go to your niece’s assistance.”

“See what it is to have an attorney’s ears!” exclaimed the Vicomtesse.
“My dear Derville, how could you know what I was saying to Camille in a
whisper?”

“I knew it from your looks,” answered Derville, seating himself in a low
chair by the fire.

Camille’s uncle went to her side, and Mme. de Grandlieu took up her
position on a hearth stool between her daughter and Derville.

“The time has come for telling a story, which should modify your
judgment as to Ernest de Restaud’s prospects.”

“A story?” cried Camille. “Do begin at once, monsieur.”

The glance that Derville gave the Vicomtesse told her that this tale was
meant for her. The Vicomtesse de Grandlieu was one of the greatest ladies
in the Faubourg Saint‑Germain, by her fortune and ancient name; and
though it may seem improbable that a Paris attorney should speak so
familiar to her or be so much at home in her house, the fact is easily
explained.

When Mme. de Grandlieu returned to France with the Royal family, she
came to Paris, and at first lived entirely on the pension allowed her
out of the Civil List by Louis XVIII.—an intolerable position. The
Hotel de Grandlieu had been sold by the Republic. Derville discovered
flaws in the title and thought it ought to return to the Vicomtesse.
He instituted proceedings for nullity of contract, and gained the day.
Encouraged by this success, he used legal quibbles to such purpose that
he compelled some institution to disgorge the Forest of Liceney. Then
he won lawsuits against the Canal d’Orleans, and recovered a tolerably
large amount of property the Emperor had endowed public institutions
with. So it fell out that, thanks to the young attorney’s skilful
management, Mme. de Grandlieu’s income reached some sixty thousand
francs, to say nothing of vast sums returned to her by the law of
indemnity. And Derville, a man of high character, well informed, modest,
and pleasant in company, became the house‑friend of the family.

By his conduct of Mme. de Grandlieu’s affairs he had fairly earned the
esteem of the Faubourg Saint‑Germain, and numbered the best families
among his clients; but he did not take advantage of his popularity, as
an ambitious man might have. The Vicomtesse would have had him sell his
practice and enter the magistracy, in which career advancement would
have been swift and certain with such influence at his disposal; but he
persistently refused all offers. He only went into society to keep up
his connections, but he occasionally spent an evening at the Hotel de
Grandlieu. It was very lucky for him that his talents had been brought
into the light by his devotion to Mme. de Grandlieu, for his practice
otherwise might have gone to pieces. Derville had not an attorney’s
soul. Since Ernest de Restaud had appeared at the Hotel de Grandlieu,
and he had noticed that Camille felt attracted to the young man,
Derville had been as assiduous in his visits as any dandy of the
Chaussee‑d’Antin newly admitted to the noble Faubourg. At a ball only
a few days before, when he happened to stand near Camille, and said,
indicating the Count:

“It is a pity that yonder youngster has not two or three million francs,
is it not?”

“Is it a pity? I do not think so,” the girl answered. “M. de Restaud
has plenty of ability; he is well educated, and the Minister, his
chief, thinks well of him. He will be a remarkable man, I have no doubt.
‘Yonder youngster’ will have as much money as he wishes when he comes
into power.”

“Yes, but suppose that he were rich already?”

“Rich already?” repeated Camille, flushing red. “Why all the girls
in the room would be quarreling for him,” she said, glancing at the
quadrilles.

“And then,” retorted the attorney, “Mlle. de Grandlieu might not be the
one towards whom his eyes are always turned? That is what that red color
means! You like him, do you not? Come, speak out.”

Camille suddenly rose to go.

“She loves him,” Derville thought.

Since that evening, Camille had been unwontedly attentive to the
attorney, who approved of her liking for Ernest de Restaud. Hitherto,
although she knew well that her family lay under great obligations to
Derville, she had felt respect rather than real friendship for him;
their relation was more a matter of politeness than of warmth of
feeling; and by her manner, and by the tones of her voice, she had
always made him sensible of the distance which socially lay between
them. Gratitude is a charge upon the inheritance which the second
generation is apt to repudiate.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“This adventure,” Derville began after a pause, “brings the one romantic event in my life to mind. You are laughing already,” he went on; “it seems so ridiculous, doesn’t it, that an attorney should speak of a romance in his life? But once I was five-and-twenty, like everybody else, and even then I had seen some queer things. I ought to begin at the beginning by telling you about some one whom it is impossible that you should have known. The man in question was a usurer.

“Can you grasp a clear notion of that sallow, wan face of his? I wish the Academie would give me leave to dub such faces the lunar type. It was like silver-gilt, with the gilt rubbed off. His hair was iron-gray, sleek, and carefully combed; his features might have been cast in bronze; Talleyrand himself was not more impassive than this money-lender. A pair of little eyes, yellow as a ferret’s, and with scarce an eyelash to them, peered out from under the sheltering peak of a shabby old cap, as if they feared the light. He had the thin lips that you see in Rembrandt’s or Metsu’s portraits of alchemists and shrunken old men, and a nose so sharp at the tip that it put you in mind of a gimlet. His voice was so low; he always spoke suavely; he never flew into a passion. His age was a problem; it was hard to say whether he had grown old before his time, or whether by economy of youth he had saved enough to last him his life.

“His room, and everything in it, from the green baize of the bureau to the strip of carpet by the bed, was as clean and threadbare as the chilly sanctuary of some elderly spinster who spends her days in rubbing her furniture. In winter time, the live brands of the fire smouldered all day in a bank of ashes; there was never any flame in his grate. He went through his day, from his uprising to his evening coughing-fit, with the regularity of a pendulum, and in some sort was a clockwork man, wound up by a night’s slumber. Touch a wood-louse on an excursion across your sheet of paper, and the creature shams death; and in something the same way my acquaintance would stop short in the middle of a sentence, while a cart went by, to save the strain to his voice. Following the example of Fontenelle, he was thrifty of pulse-strokes, and concentrated all human sensibility in the innermost sanctuary of Self.

“His life flowed soundless as the sands of an hour-glass. His victims sometimes flew into a rage and made a great deal of noise, followed by a great silence; so is it in a kitchen after a fowl’s neck has been wrung.

“Toward evening this bill of exchange incarnate would assume ordinary human shape, and his metals were metamorphosed into a human heart. When he was satisfied with his day’s business, he would rub his hands; his inward glee would escape like smoke through every rift and wrinkle of his face;—in no other way is it possible to give an idea of the mute play of muscle which expressed sensations similar to the soundless laughter of Leather Stocking. Indeed, even in transports of joy, his conversation was confined to monosyllables; he wore the same non-committal countenance.

“This was the neighbor Chance found for me in the house in the Rue de Gres, where I used to live when as yet I was only a second clerk finishing my third year’s studies. The house is damp and dark, and boasts no courtyard. All the windows look on the street; the whole dwelling, in claustral fashion, is divided into rooms or cells of equal size, all opening upon a long corridor dimly lit with borrowed lights. The place must have been part of an old convent once. So gloomy was it, that the gaiety of eldest sons forsook them on the stairs before they reached my neighbor’s door. He and his house were much alike; even so does the oyster resemble his native rock.

“I was the one creature with whom he had any communication, socially speaking; he would come in to ask for a light, to borrow a book or a newspaper, and of an evening he would allow me to go into his cell, and when he was in the humor we would chat together. These marks of confidence were the results of four years of neighborhood and my own sober conduct. From sheer lack of pence, I was bound to live pretty much as he did. Had he any relations or friends? Was he rich or poor? Nobody could give an answer to these questions. I myself never saw money in his room. Doubtless his capital was safely stowed in the strong rooms of the Bank. He used to collect his bills himself as they fell due, running all over Paris on a pair of shanks as skinny as a stag’s. On occasion he would be a martyr to prudence. One day, when he happened to have gold in his pockets, a double napoleon worked its way, somehow or other, out of his fob and fell, and another lodger following him up the stairs picked up the coin and returned it to its owner.

“‘That isn’t mine!’ said he, with a start of surprise. ‘Mine indeed! If I were rich, should I live as I do!’

“He made his cup of coffee himself every morning on the cast-iron chafing dish which stood all day in the black angle of the grate; his dinner came in from a cookshop; and our old porter’s wife went up at the prescribed hour to set his room in order. Finally, a whimsical chance, in which Sterne would have seen predestination, had named the man Gobseck. When I did business for him later, I came to know that he was about seventy-six years old at the time when we became acquainted. He was born about 1740, in some outlying suburb of Antwerp, of a Dutch father and a Jewish mother, and his name was Jean-Esther Van Gobseck. You remember how all Paris took an interest in that murder case, a woman named La belle Hollandaise? I happened to mention it to my old neighbor, and he answered without the slightest symptom of interest or surprise, ‘She is my grandniece.’

“That was the only remark drawn from him by the death of his sole surviving next of kin, his sister’s granddaughter. From reports of the case I found that La belle Hollandaise was in fact named Sara Van Gobseck. When I asked by what curious chance his grandniece came to bear his surname, he smiled:

“‘The women never marry in our family.’

“Singular creature, he had never cared to find out a single relative among four generations counted on the female side. The thought of his heirs was abhorrent to him; and the idea that his wealth could pass into other hands after his death simply inconceivable.

“He was a child, ten years old, when his mother shipped him off as a cabin boy on a voyage to the Dutch Straits Settlements, and there he knocked about for twenty years. The inscrutable lines on that sallow forehead kept the secret of horrible adventures, sudden panic, unhoped-for luck, romantic cross events, joys that knew no limit, hunger endured and love trampled under foot, fortunes risked, lost, and recovered, life endangered time and time again, and saved, it may be, by one of the rapid, ruthless decisions absolved by necessity. He had known Admiral Simeuse, M. de Lally, M. de Kergarouet, M. d’Estaing, le Bailli de Suffren, M. de Portenduere, Lord Cornwallis, Lord Hastings, Tippoo Sahib’s father, Tippoo Sahib himself. The bully who served Mahadaji Sindhia, King of Delhi, and did so much to found the power of the Mahrattas, had had dealings with Gobseck. Long residence at St. Thomas brought him in contact with Victor Hughes and other notorious pirates. In his quest of fortune he had left no stone unturned; witness an attempt to discover the treasure of that tribe of savages so famous in Buenos Ayres and its neighborhood. He had a personal knowledge of the events of the American War of Independence. But if he spoke of the Indies or of America, as he did very rarely with me, and never with anyone else, he seemed to regard it as an indiscretion and to repent of it afterwards. If humanity and sociability are in some sort a religion, Gobseck might be ranked as an infidel; but though I set myself to study him, I must confess, to my shame, that his real nature was impenetrable up to the very last. I even felt doubts at times as to his sex. If all usurers are like this one, I maintain that they belong to the neuter gender.

“Did he adhere to his mother’s religion? Did he look on Gentiles as his legitimate prey? Had he turned Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Mahometan, Brahmin, or what not? I never knew anything whatsoever about his religious opinions, and so far as I could see, he was indifferent rather than incredulous.

“One evening I went in to see this man who had turned himself to gold; the usurer, whom his victims (his clients, as he styled them) were wont to call Daddy Gobseck, perhaps ironically, perhaps by way of antiphrasis. He was sitting in his armchair, motionless as a statue, staring fixedly at the mantel-shelf, where he seemed to read the figures of his statements. A lamp, with a pedestal that had once been green, was burning in the room; but so far from taking color from its smoky light, his face seemed to stand out positively paler against the background. He pointed to a chair set for me, but not a word did he say.

“‘What thoughts can this being have in his mind?’ said I to myself. ‘Does he know that a God exists; does he know there are such things as feeling, woman, happiness?’ I pitied him as I might have pitied a diseased creature. But, at the same time, I knew quite well that while he had millions of francs at his command, he possessed the world no less in idea—that world which he had explored, ransacked, weighed, appraised, and exploited.

“‘Good day, Daddy Gobseck,’ I began.

“He turned his face towards me with a slight contraction of his bushy, black eyebrows; this characteristic shade of expression in him meant as much as the most jubilant smile on a Southern face.

“‘You look just as gloomy as you did that day when the news came of the failure of that bookseller whose sharpness you admired so much, though you were one of his victims.’

“‘One of his victims?’ he repeated, with a look of astonishment.

“‘Yes. Did you not refuse to accept composition at the meeting of creditors until he undertook privately to pay you your debt in full; and did he not give you bills accepted by the insolvent firm; and then, when he set up in business again, did he not pay you the dividend upon those bills of yours, signed as they were by the bankrupt firm?’

“‘He was a sharp one, but I had it out of him.’

“‘Then have you some bills to protest? To-day is the 30th, I believe.’

“It was the first time I had spoken to him of money. He looked ironically up at me; then in those bland accents, not unlike the husky tones which the tyro draws from a flute, he answered, ‘I am amusing myself.’

“‘So you amuse yourself now and again?’

“‘Do you imagine that the only poets in the world are those who print their verses?’ he asked, with a pitying look and shrug of the shoulders.

“‘Poetry in that head!’ thought I, for as yet I knew nothing of his life.

“‘What life could be as glorious as mine?’ he continued, and his eyes lighted up. ‘You are young, your mental visions are colored by youthful blood, you see women’s faces in the fire, while I see nothing but coals in mine. You have all sorts of beliefs, while I have no beliefs at all. Keep your illusions—if you can. Now I will show you life with the discount taken off. Go wherever you like, or stay at home by the fireside with your wife, there always comes a time when you settle down in a certain groove, the groove is your preference; and then happiness consists in the exercise of your faculties by applying them to realities. Anything more in the way of precept is false. My principles have been various, among various men; I had to change them with every change of latitude. Things that we admire in Europe are punishable in Asia, and a vice in Paris becomes a necessity when you have passed the Azores. There are no such things as hard-and-fast rules; there are only conventions adapted to the climate. Fling a man headlong into one social melting pot after another, and convictions and forms and moral systems become so many meaningless words to him. The one thing that always remains, the one sure instinct that nature has implanted in us, is the instinct of self-interest. If you had lived as long as I have, you would know that there is but one concrete reality invariable enough to be worth caring about, and that is—GOLD. Gold represents every form of human power. I have traveled. I found out that there were either hills or plains everywhere: the plains are monotonous, the hills a weariness; consequently, place may be left out of the question. As to manners; man is man all the world over. The same battle between the poor and the rich is going on everywhere; it is inevitable everywhere; consequently, it is better to exploit than to be exploited. Everywhere you find the man of thews and sinews who toils, and the lymphatic man who torments himself; and pleasures are everywhere the same, for when all sensations are exhausted, all that survives is Vanity—Vanity is the abiding substance of us, the I in us. Vanity is only to be satisfied by gold in floods. Our dreams need time and physical means and painstaking thought before they can be realized. Well, gold contains all things in embryo; gold realizes all things for us.

“‘None but fools and invalids can find pleasure in shuffling cards all evening long to find out whether they shall win a few pence at the end. None but driveling idiots could spend time in inquiring into all that is happening around them, whether Madame Such-an-One slept single on her couch or in company, whether she has more blood than lymph, more temperament than virtue. None but the dupes, who fondly imagine that they are useful to their like, can interest themselves in laying down rules for political guidance amid events which neither they nor any one else foresees, nor ever will foresee. None but simpletons can delight in talking about stage players and repeating their sayings; making the daily promenade of a caged animal over a rather larger area; dressing for others, eating for others, priding themselves on a horse or a carriage such as no neighbor can have until three days later. What is all this but Parisian life summed up in a few phrases? Let us find a higher outlook on life than theirs. Happiness consists either in strong emotions which drain our vitality, or in methodical occupation which makes existence like a bit of English machinery, working with the regularity of clockwork. A higher happiness than either consists in a curiosity, styled noble, a wish to learn Nature’s secrets, or to attempt by artificial means to imitate Nature to some extent. What is this in two words but Science and Art, or passion or calm?—Ah! well, every human passion wrought up to its highest pitch in the struggle for existence comes to parade itself before me—as I live in calm. As for your scientific curiosity, a kind of wrestling bout in which man is never uppermost, I replace it by an insight into all the springs of action in man and woman. To sum up, the world is mine without effort of mine, and the world has not the slightest hold on me. Listen to this,’ he went on, ‘I will tell you the history of my morning, and you will divine my pleasures.’

“He got up, pushed the bolt of the door, drew a tapestry curtain across it with a sharp grating sound of the rings on the rod, then he sat down again.

“‘This morning,’ he said, ‘I had only two amounts to collect; the rest of the bills that were due I gave away instead of cash to my customers yesterday. So much saved, you see, for when I discount a bill I always deduct two francs for a hired brougham—expenses of collection. A pretty thing it would be, would it not, if my clients were to set me trudging all over Paris for half-a-dozen francs of discount, when no man is my master, and I only pay seven francs in the shape of taxes?

“‘The first bill for a thousand francs was presented by a young fellow, a smart buck with a spangled waistcoat, and an eyeglass, and a tilbury and an English horse, and all the rest of it. The bill bore the signature of one of the prettiest women in Paris, married to a Count, a great landowner. Now, how came that Countess to put her name to a bill of exchange, legally not worth the paper it was written upon, but practically very good business; for these women, poor things, are afraid of the scandal that a protested bill makes in a family, and would give themselves away in payment sooner than fail? I wanted to find out what that bill of exchange really represented. Was it stupidity, imprudence, love or charity?

“‘The second bill, bearing the signature “Fanny Malvaut,” came to me from a linen-draper on the highway to bankruptcy. Now, no creature who has any credit with a bank comes to me. The first step to my door means that a man is desperately hard up; that the news of his failure will soon come out: and, most of all, it means that he has been everywhere else first. The stag is always at bay when I see him, and a pack of creditors are hard upon his track. The Countess lived in the Rue du Helder, and my Fanny in the Rue Montmartre. How many conjectures I made as I set out this morning! If these two women were not able to pay, they would show me more respect than they would show their own fathers. What tricks and grimaces would not the Countess try for a thousand francs! She would be so nice to me, she would talk to me in that ingratiating tone peculiar to endorsers of bills, she would pour out a torrent of coaxing words, perhaps she would beg and pray, and I...’ (here the old man turned his pale eyes upon me)—‘and I not to be moved, inexorable!’ he continued. ‘I am there as the avenger, the apparition of Remorse. So much for hypotheses. I reached the house.

“‘“Madame la Comtesse is asleep,” says the maid.

“‘“When can I see her?”

“‘“At twelve o’clock.”

“‘“Is Madame la Comtesse ill?”

“‘“No, sir, but she only came home at three o’clock this morning from a ball.”

“‘“My name is Gobseck, tell her that I shall call again at twelve o’clock,” and I went out, leaving traces of my muddy boots on the carpet which covered the paved staircase. I like to leave mud on a rich man’s carpet; it is not petty spite; I like to make them feel a touch of the claws of Necessity. In the Rue Montmartre I thrust open the old gateway of a poor-looking house, and looked into a dark courtyard where the sunlight never shines. The porter’s lodge was grimy, the window looked like the sleeve of some shabby wadded gown—greasy, dirty, and full of holes.

“‘“Mlle. Fanny Malvaut?”

“‘“She has gone out; but if you have come about a bill, the money is waiting for you.”

“‘“I will look in again,” said I.

“‘As soon as I knew that the porter had the money for me, I wanted to know what the girl was like; I pictured her as pretty. The rest of the morning I spent in looking at the prints in the shop windows along the boulevard; then, just as it struck twelve, I went through the Countess’ ante-chamber.

“‘“Madame has just this minute rung for me,” said the maid; “I don’t think she can see you yet.”

“‘“I will wait,” said I, and sat down in an easy-chair.

“‘Venetian shutters were opened, and presently the maid came hurrying back.

“‘“Come in, sir.”

“‘From the sweet tone of the girl’s voice, I knew that the mistress could not be ready to pay. What a handsome woman it was that I saw in another moment! She had flung an Indian shawl hastily over her bare shoulders, covering herself with it completely, while it revealed the bare outlines of the form beneath. She wore a loose gown trimmed with snowy ruffles, which told plainly that her laundress’ bills amounted to something like two thousand francs in the course of a year. Her dark curls escaped from beneath a bright Indian handkerchief, knotted carelessly about her head after the fashion of Creole women. The bed lay in disorder that told of broken slumber. A painter would have paid money to stay a while to see the scene that I saw. Under the luxurious hanging draperies, the pillow, crushed into the depths of an eider-down quilt, its lace border standing out in contrast against the background of blue silk, bore a vague impress that kindled the imagination. A pair of satin slippers gleamed from the great bear-skin rug spread by the carved mahogany lions at the bed-foot, where she had flung them off in her weariness after the ball. A crumpled gown hung over a chair, the sleeves touching the floor; stockings which a breath would have blown away were twisted about the leg of an easy-chair; while ribbon garters straggled over a settee. A fan of price, half unfolded, glittered on the chimney-piece. Drawers stood open; flowers, diamonds, gloves, a bouquet, a girdle, were littered about. The room was full of vague sweet perfume. And—beneath all the luxury and disorder, beauty and incongruity, I saw Misery crouching in wait for her or for her adorer, Misery rearing its head, for the Countess had begun to feel the edge of those fangs. Her tired face was an epitome of the room strewn with relics of past festival. The scattered gewgaws, pitiable this morning, when gathered together and coherent, had turned heads the night before.

“‘What efforts to drink of the Tantalus cup of bliss I could read in these traces of love stricken by the thunderbolt remorse—in this visible presentment of a life of luxury, extravagance, and riot. There were faint red marks on her young face, signs of the fineness of the skin; but her features were coarsened, as it were, and the circles about her eyes were unwontedly dark. Nature nevertheless was so vigorous in her, that these traces of past folly did not spoil her beauty. Her eyes glittered. She looked like some Herodias of da Vinci’s (I have dealt in pictures), so magnificently full of life and energy was she; there was nothing starved nor stinted in feature or outline; she awakened desire; it seemed to me that there was some passion in her yet stronger than love. I was taken with her. It was a long while since my heart had throbbed; so I was paid then and there—for I would give a thousand francs for a sensation that should bring me back memories of youth.

“‘“Monsieur,” she said, finding a chair for me, “will you be so good as to wait?”

“‘“Until this time to-morrow, madame,” I said, folding up the bill again. “I cannot legally protest this bill any sooner.” And within myself I said—“Pay the price of your luxury, pay for your name, pay for your ease, pay for the monopoly which you enjoy! The rich have invented judges and courts of law to secure their goods, and the guillotine—that candle in which so many lie in silk, under silken coverlets, there is remorse, and grinding of teeth beneath a smile, and those fantastical lions’ jaws are gaping to set their fangs in your heart.”

“‘“Protest the bill! Can you mean it?” she cried, with her eyes upon me; “could you have so little consideration for me?”

“‘“If the King himself owed money to me, madame, and did not pay it, I should summons him even sooner than any other debtor.”

“‘While we were speaking, somebody tapped gently at the door.

“‘“I cannot see any one,” she cried imperiously.

“‘“But, Anastasie, I particularly wish to speak to you.”

“‘“Not just now, dear,” she answered in a milder tone, but with no sign of relenting.

“‘“What nonsense! You are talking to some one,” said the voice, and in came a man who could only be the Count.

“‘The Countess gave me a glance. I saw how it was. She was thoroughly in my power. There was a time, when I was young, and might perhaps have been stupid enough not to protest the bill. At Pondicherry, in 1763, I let a woman off, and nicely she paid me out afterwards. I deserved it; what call was there for me to trust her?

“‘“What does this gentleman want?” asked the Count.

“‘I could see that the Countess was trembling from head to foot; the white satin skin of her throat was rough, “turned to goose flesh,” to use the familiar expression. As for me, I laughed in myself without moving a muscle.

“‘“This gentleman is one of my tradesmen,” she said.

“‘The Count turned his back on me; I drew the bill half out of my pocket. After that inexorable movement, she came over to me and put a diamond into my hands. “Take it,” she said, “and be gone.”

“‘We exchanged values, and I made my bow and went. The diamond was quite worth twelve hundred francs to me. Out in the courtyard I saw a swarm of flunkeys, brushing out their liveries, waxing their boots, and cleaning sumptuous equipages.

“‘“This is what brings these people to me!” said I to myself. “It is to keep up this kind of thing that they steal millions with all due formalities, and betray their country. The great lord, and the little man who apes the great lord, bathes in mud once for all to save himself a splash or two when he goes afoot through the streets.”

“‘Just then the great gates were opened to admit a cabriolet. It was the same young fellow who had brought the bill to me.

“‘“Sir,” I said, as he alighted, “here are two hundred francs, which I beg you to return to Mme. la Comtesse, and have the goodness to tell her that I hold the pledge which she deposited with me this morning at her disposition for a week.”

“‘He took the two hundred francs, and an ironical smile stole over his face; it was as if he had said, “Aha! so she has paid it, has she? ... Faith, so much the better!” I read the Countess’ future in his face. That good-looking, fair-haired young gentleman is a heartless gambler; he will ruin himself, ruin her, ruin her husband, ruin the children, eat up their portions, and work more havoc in Parisian salons than a whole battery of howitzers in a regiment.

“‘I went back to see Mlle. Fanny in the Rue Montmartre, climbed a very steep, narrow staircase, and reached a two-roomed dwelling on the fifth floor. Everything was as neat as a new ducat. I did not see a speck of dust on the furniture in the first room, where Mlle. Fanny was sitting. Mlle. Fanny herself was a young Parisian girl, quietly dressed, with a delicate fresh face, and a winning look. The arrangement of her neatly brushed chestnut hair in a double curve on her forehead lent a refined expression to blue eyes, clear as crystal. The broad daylight streaming in through the short curtains against the window pane fell with softened light on her girlish face. A pile of shaped pieces of linen told me that she was a sempstress. She looked like a spirit of solitude. When I held out the bill, I remarked that she had not been at home when I called in the morning.

“‘“But the money was left with the porter’s wife,” said she.

“‘I pretended not to understand.

“‘“You go out early, mademoiselle, it seems.”

“‘“I very seldom leave my room; but when you work all night, you are obliged to take a bath sometimes.”

“‘I looked at her. A glance told me all about her life. Here was a girl condemned by misfortune to toil, a girl who came of honest farmer folk, for she had still a freckle or two that told of country birth. There was an indefinable atmosphere of goodness about her; I felt as if I were breathing sincerity and frank innocence. It was refreshing to my lungs. Poor innocent child, she had faith in something; there was a crucifix and a sprig or two of green box above her poor little painted wooden bedstead; I felt touched, or somewhat inclined that way. I felt ready to offer to charge no more than twelve per cent, and so give something towards establishing her in a good way of business.

“‘“But maybe she has a little youngster of a cousin,” I said to myself, “who would raise money on her signature and sponge on the poor girl.”

“‘So I went away, keeping my generous impulses well under control; for I have frequently had occasion to observe that when benevolence does no harm to him who gives it, it is the ruin of him who takes. When you came in I was thinking that Fanny Malvaut would make a nice little wife; I was thinking of the contrast between her pure, lonely life and the life of the Countess—she has sunk as low as a bill of exchange already, she will sink to the lowest depths of degradation before she has done!’—I scrutinized him during the deep silence that followed, but in a moment he spoke again. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘do you think that it is nothing to have this power of insight into the deepest recesses of the human heart, to embrace so many lives, to see the naked truth underlying it all? There are no two dramas alike: there are hideous sores, deadly chagrins, love scenes, misery that soon will lie under the ripples of the Seine, young men’s joys that lead to the scaffold, the laughter of despair, and sumptuous banquets. Yesterday it was a tragedy. A worthy soul of a father drowned himself because he could not support his family. To-morrow is a comedy; some youngster will try to rehearse the scene of M. Dimanche, brought up to date. You have heard the people extol the eloquence of our latter day preachers; now and again I have wasted my time by going to hear them; they produced a change in my opinions, but in my conduct (as somebody said, I can’t recollect his name), in my conduct—never!—Well, well; these good priests and your Mirabeaus and Vergniauds and the rest of them, are mere stammering beginners compared with these orators of mine.

“‘Often it is some girl in love, some gray-headed merchant on the verge of bankruptcy, some mother with a son’s wrong-doing to conceal, some starving artist, some great man whose influence is on the wane, and, for lack of money, is like to lose the fruit of all his labors—the power of their pleading has made me shudder. Sublime actors such as these play for me, for an audience of one, and they cannot deceive me. I can look into their inmost thoughts, and read them as God reads them. Nothing is hidden from me. Nothing is refused to the holder of the purse-strings to loose and to bind. I am rich enough to buy the consciences of those who control the action of ministers, from their office boys to their mistresses. Is not that power?—I can possess the fairest women, receive their softest caresses; is not that Pleasure? And is not your whole social economy summed up in terms of Power and Pleasure?

“‘There are ten of us in Paris, silent, unknown kings, the arbiters of your destinies. What is life but a machine set in motion by money? Know this for certain—methods are always confounded with results; you will never succeed in separating the soul from the senses, spirit from matter. Gold is the spiritual basis of existing society.—The ten of us are bound by the ties of common interest; we meet on certain days of the week at the Cafe Themis near the Pont Neuf, and there, in conclave, we reveal the mysteries of finance. No fortune can deceive us; we are in possession of family secrets in all directions. We keep a kind of Black Book, in which we note the most important bills issued, drafts on public credit, or on banks, or given and taken in the course of business. We are the Casuists of the Paris Bourse, a kind of Inquisition weighing and analyzing the most insignificant actions of every man of any fortune, and our forecasts are infallible. One of us looks out over the judicial world, one over the financial, another surveys the administrative, and yet another the business world. I myself keep an eye on eldest sons, artists, people in the great world, and gamblers—on the most sensational side of Paris. Every one who comes to us lets us into his neighbor’s secrets. Thwarted passion and mortified vanity are great babblers. Vice and disappointment and vindictiveness are the best of all detectives. My colleagues, like myself, have enjoyed all things, are sated with all things, and have reached the point when power and money are loved for their own sake.

“‘Here,’ he said, indicating his bare, chilly room, ‘here the most high-mettled gallant, who chafes at a word and draws swords for a syllable elsewhere will entreat with clasped hands. There is no city merchant so proud, no woman so vain of her beauty, no soldier of so bold a spirit, but that they entreat me here, one and all, with tears of rage or anguish in their eyes. Here they kneel—the famous artist, and the man of letters, whose name will go down to posterity. Here, in short’ (he lifted his hand to his forehead), ‘all the inheritances and all the concerns of all Paris are weighed in the balance. Are you still of the opinion that there are no delights behind the blank mask which so often has amazed you by its impassiveness?’ he asked, stretching out that livid face which reeked of money.

“I went back to my room, feeling stupefied. The little, wizened old man had grown great. He had been metamorphosed under my eyes into a strange visionary symbol; he had come to be the power of gold personified. I shrank, shuddering, from life and my kind.

“‘Is it really so?’ I thought; ‘must everything be resolved into gold?’

“I remember that it was long before I slept that night. I saw heaps of gold all about me. My thoughts were full of the lovely Countess; I confess, to my shame, that the vision completely eclipsed another quiet, innocent figure, the figure of the woman who had entered upon a life of toil and obscurity; but on the morrow, through the clouds of slumber, Fanny’s sweet face rose before me in all its beauty, and I thought of nothing else.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“Will you take a glass of _eau sucree_?” asked the Vicomtesse, interrupting Derville.

“I should be glad of it.”

“But I can see nothing in this that can touch our concerns,” said Mme. de Grandlieu, as she rang the bell.

“Sardanapalus!” cried Derville, flinging out his favorite invocation. “Mademoiselle Camille will be wide awake in a moment if I say that her happiness depended not so long ago upon Daddy Gobseck; but as the old gentleman died at the age of ninety, M. de Restaud will soon be in possession of a handsome fortune. This requires some explanation. As for poor Fanny Malvaut, you know her; she is my wife.”

“Poor fellow, he would admit that, with his usual frankness, with a score of people to hear him!” said the Vicomtesse.

“I would proclaim it to the universe,” said the attorney.

“Go on, drink your glass, my poor Derville. You will never be anything but the happiest and the best of men.”

“I left you in the Rue du Helder,” remarked the uncle, raising his face after a gentle doze. “You had gone to see a Countess; what have you done with her?”

“A few days after my conversation with the old Dutchman,” Derville continued, “I sent in my thesis, and became first a licentiate in law, and afterwards an advocate. The old miser’s opinion of me rose considerably. He consulted me (gratis) on the ticklish bits of business he undertook when he had made sure how he stood—business that would have seemed unsafe to an ordinary practitioner. This man, over whom no one seemed to have the slightest influence, listened to my advice with something like respect. It is true that it always turned out very well.

“At length I became head-clerk in the office where I had worked for three years and then I left the Rue des Gres for rooms in my employer’s house. I had my board and lodging and a hundred and fifty francs per month. It was a great day for me!

“When I went to bid the usurer good-bye, he showed no feeling, neither cordial nor sorry to lose me; he did not ask me to come to see him, and only gave me one of those glances which seemed in some sort to reveal a power of second-sight.

“By the end of a week my old neighbor came to see me with a thorny bit of business, an expropriation, and continued to ask for my advice with as much freedom as if he paid for it.

“My principal was a man of pleasure and expensive tastes; before the second year (1818–1819) was out he had got into difficulties, and was obliged to sell his practice. A professional connection in those days did not fetch the present exorbitant prices, and my principal asked a hundred and fifty thousand francs. An active man of competent knowledge might hope to pay off the capital in ten years, paying interest and living respectably in the meantime—if he could command confidence. But I, the seventh child of a small tradesman at Noyon, had not a sou to my name, nor personal acquaintance with any capitalist but Daddy Gobseck. An ambitious idea, and an indefinable glimmer of hope, put heart into me. To Gobseck I betook myself, and slowly one evening I made my way to the Rue des Gres. My heart thumped as I knocked at his door in the gloomy house. I recollected all he used to tell me, at a time when I was far from suspecting the violence of the anguish awaiting those who crossed his threshold. Now it was I who was about to beg and pray like so many others.

“‘Well, no, not _that_,’ I said to myself; ‘an honest man must keep his self-respect wherever he goes. Success is not worth cringing for; let us show him a front as decided as his own.’

“Daddy Gobseck had taken my room since I left the house, so as to have no neighbor; he had made a little grated window too in his door since then, and did not open until he had taken a look at me and saw who I was.

“‘Well,’ said he, in his thin, flute notes, ‘so your principal is selling his practice?’

“‘How did you know that?’ said I; ‘he has not spoken of it as yet except to me.’

“The old man’s lips were drawn in puckers, like a curtain; a soundless smile bore a hard glance company.

“‘Nothing else would have brought you here,’ he said drily, after a pause, which I spent in confusion.

“‘Listen to me, M. Gobseck,’ I began, with such serenity as I could assume. He gazed at me with steady eyes. There was a clear light burning in them that disconcerted me.

“He made a gesture as if to bid me ‘Go on.’ ‘I know that it is not easy to work on your feelings, so I will not waste my eloquence on the attempt to put my position before you—I am a penniless clerk, with no one to look to but you, and no heart in the world but yours can form a clear idea of my probable future. Let us leave hearts out of the question. Business is business, and business is not carried on with sentimentality like romances. Now to the facts. My principal’s practice is worth in his hands about twenty thousand francs per annum; in my hands, I think it would bring in forty thousand. He is willing to sell it for a hundred and fifty thousand francs. And _here_,’ I said, striking my forehead, ‘I feel that if you would lend me the purchase-money, I could clear it off in ten years’ time.’

“‘Come, that is plain speaking,’ said Daddy Gobseck, and he held out his hand and grasped mine. ‘Nobody since I have been in business has stated the motives of his visit more clearly. Guarantees?’ asked he, scanning me from head to foot. ‘None to give,’ he added after a pause, ‘How old are you?’

“‘Twenty-five in ten days’ time,’ said I, ‘or I could not open the matter.’

“‘Precisely.’

“‘Well?’

“‘It is possible.’

“‘My word, we must be quick about it, or I shall have some one buying over my head.’

“‘Bring your certificate of birth round to-morrow morning, and we will talk. I will think it over.’

“Next morning, at eight o’clock, I stood in the old man’s room. He took the document, put on his spectacles, coughed, spat, wrapped himself up in his black greatcoat, and read the whole certificate through from beginning to end. Then he turned it over and over, looked at me, coughed again, fidgeted in his chair, and said, ‘We will try to arrange this bit of business.’

“I trembled.

“‘I make fifty per cent on my capital,’ he continued, ‘sometimes I make a hundred, two hundred, five hundred per cent.’

“I turned pale at the words.

“‘But as we are acquaintances, I shall be satisfied to take twelve and a half per cent per—’ (he hesitated)—‘well, yes, from you I would be content to take thirteen per cent per annum. Will that suit you?’

“‘Yes,’ I answered.

“‘But if it is too much, stick up for yourself, Grotius!’ (a name he jokingly gave me). ‘When I ask you for thirteen per cent, it is all in the way of business; look into it, see if you can pay it; I don’t like a man to agree too easily. Is it too much?’

“‘No,’ said I, ‘I will make up for it by working a little harder.’

“‘Gad! your clients will pay for it!’ said he, looking at me wickedly out of the corner of his eyes.

“‘No, by all the devils in hell!’ cried I, ‘it shall be I who will pay. I would sooner cut my hand off than flay people.’

“‘Good-night,’ said Daddy Gobseck.

“‘Why, fees are all according to scale,’ I added.

“‘Not for compromises and settlements out of Court, and cases where litigants come to terms,’ said he. ‘You can send in a bill for thousands of francs, six thousand even at a swoop (it depends on the importance of the case), for conferences with So-and-so, and expenses, and drafts, and memorials, and your jargon. A man must learn to look out for business of this kind. I will recommend you as a most competent, clever attorney. I will send you such a lot of work of this sort that your colleagues will be fit to burst with envy. Werbrust, Palma, and Gigonnet, my cronies, shall hand over their expropriations to you; they have plenty of them, the Lord knows! So you will have two practices—the one you are buying, and the other I will build up for you. You ought almost to pay me fifteen per cent on my loan.’

“‘So be it, but no more,’ said I, with the firmness which means a man is determined not to concede another point.

“Daddy Gobseck’s face relaxed; he looked pleased.

“‘I shall pay the money over to your principal myself,’ said he, ‘so as to establish a lien on the purchase and caution-money.’

“‘Oh, anything you like in the way of guarantees.’

“‘And besides that, you will give me bills for the amount made payable to a third party (name left blank), fifteen bills of ten thousand francs each.’

“‘Well, so long as it is acknowledged in writing that this is a double—’

“‘No!’ Gobseck broke in. ‘No! Why should I trust you any more than you trust me?’

“I kept silence.

“‘And furthermore,’ he continued with a sort of good humor, ‘you will give me your advice without charging fees as long as I live, will you not?’

“‘So be it; so long as there is no outlay.’

“‘Precisely,’ said he. ‘Ah, by the by, you will allow me to go to see you?’ (Plainly the old man found it not so easy to assume the air of good humor.)

“‘I shall always be glad.’

“‘Ah! yes, but it would be very difficult to arrange of a morning. You will have your affairs to attend to, and I have mine.’

“‘Then come in the evening.’

“‘Oh, no!’ he answered briskly, ‘you ought to go into society and see your clients, and I myself have my friends at my cafe.’

“‘His friends!’ thought I to myself. ‘Very well,’ said I, ‘why not come at dinner-time?’

“‘That is the time,’ said Gobseck, ‘after ‘Change, at five o’clock. Good, you will see me Wednesdays and Saturdays. We will talk over business like a pair of friends. Aha! I am gay sometimes. Just give me the wing of a partridge and a glass of champagne, and we will have our chat together. I know a great many things that can be told now at this distance of time; I will teach you to know men, and what is more—women!’

“‘Oh! a partridge and a glass of champagne if you like.’

“‘Don’t do anything foolish, or I shall lose my faith in you. And don’t set up housekeeping in a grand way. Just one old general servant. I will come and see that you keep your health. I have capital invested in your head, he! he! so I am bound to look after you. There, come round in the evening and bring your principal with you!’

“‘Would you mind telling me, if there is no harm in asking, what was the good of my birth certificate in this business?’ I asked, when the little old man and I stood on the doorstep.

“Jean-Esther Van Gobseck shrugged his shoulders, smiled maliciously, and said, ‘What blockheads youngsters are! Learn, master attorney (for learn you must if you don’t mean to be taken in), that integrity and brains in a man under thirty are commodities which can be mortgaged. After that age there is no counting on a man.’

“And with that he shut the door.

“Three months later I was an attorney. Before very long, madame, it was my good fortune to undertake the suit for the recovery of your estates. I won the day, and my name became known. In spite of the exorbitant rate of interest, I paid off Gobseck in less than five years. I married Fanny Malvaut, whom I loved with all my heart. There was a parallel between her life and mine, between our hard work and our luck, which strengthened our feeling. One of her uncles, a well-to-do farmer, died and left her seventy thousand francs, which helped to clear off the loan. From that day my life has been little but happiness and prosperity. Nothing is more utterly uninteresting than a happy man, so let us say no more on that head, and return to the rest of the characters.

“About a year after the purchase of the practice, I was dragged into a bachelor breakfast-party given by one of our number who had lost a bet to a young man greatly in vogue in the fashionable world. M. de Trailles, the flower of the dandyism of that day, enjoyed a prodigious reputation.”

“But he is still enjoying it,” put in the Comte de Born. “No one wears his clothes with a finer air, nor drives a tandem with a better grace. It is Maxime’s gift; he can gamble, eat, and drink more gracefully than any man. He is a judge of horses, hats, and pictures. All the women lose their heads over him. He always spends something like a hundred thousand francs a year, and no creature can discover that he has an acre of land or a single dividend warrant. The typical knight errant of our salons, our boudoirs, our boulevards—an amphibian half-way between a man and a woman—Maxime de Trailles is a singular being, fit for anything, and good for nothing, quite as capable of perpetrating a benefit as of planning a crime; sometimes base, sometimes noble, more often bespattered with mire than besprinkled with blood, knowing more of anxiety than of remorse, more concerned with his digestion than with any mental process, shamming passion, feeling nothing. Maxime de Trailles is a brilliant link between the hulks and the best society; he belongs to the eminently intelligent class from which a Mirabeau, or a Pitt, or a Richelieu springs at times, though it is more wont to produce Counts of Horn, Fouquier-Tinvilles, and Coignards.”

“Well,” pursued Derville, when he had heard the Vicomtesse’s brother to the end, “I had heard a good deal about this individual from poor old Goriot, a client of mine; and I had already been at some pains to avoid the dangerous honor of his acquaintance, for I came across him sometimes in society. Still, my chum was so pressing about this breakfast-party of his that I could not well get out of it, unless I wished to earn a name for squeamishness. Madame, you could hardly imagine what a bachelor’s breakfast-party is like. It means superb display and a studied refinement seldom seen; the luxury of a miser when vanity leads him to be sumptuous for a day.

“You are surprised as you enter the room at the neatness of the table, dazzling by reason of its silver and crystal and linen damask. Life is here in full bloom; the young fellows are graceful to behold; they smile and talk in low, demure voices like so many brides; everything about them looks girlish. Two hours later you might take the room for a battlefield after the fight. Broken glasses, serviettes crumpled and torn to rags lie strewn about among the nauseous-looking remnants of food on the dishes. There is an uproar that stuns you, jesting toasts, a fire of witticisms and bad jokes; faces are empurpled, eyes inflamed and expressionless, unintentional confidences tell you the whole truth. Bottles are smashed, and songs trolled out in the height of a diabolical racket; men call each other out, hang on each other’s necks, or fall to fisticuffs; the room is full of a horrid, close scent made up of a hundred odors, and noise enough for a hundred voices. No one has any notion of what he is eating or drinking or saying. Some are depressed, others babble; one will turn monomaniac, repeating the same word over and over like a bell set jangling; another tries to keep the tumult within bounds; the steadiest will propose an orgy. If any one in possession of his faculties should come in, he would think that he had interrupted a Bacchanalian rite.

“It was in the thick of such chaos that M. de Trailles tried to insinuate himself into my good graces. My head was fairly clear, I was upon my guard. As for him, though he pretended to be decently drunk, he was perfectly cool, and knew very well what he was about. How it was done I do not know, but the upshot was that when we left Grignon’s rooms about nine o’clock in the evening, M. de Trailles had thoroughly bewitched me. I had given him my promise that I would introduce him the next day to our Papa Gobseck. The words ‘honor,’ ‘virtue,’ ‘countess,’ ‘honest woman,’ and ‘ill-luck’ were mingled in his discourse with magical potency, thanks to that golden tongue of his.

“When I awoke next morning, and tried to recollect what I had done the day before, it was with great difficulty that I could make a connected tale from my impressions. At last, it seemed to me that the daughter of one of my clients was in danger of losing her reputation, together with her husband’s love and esteem, if she could not get fifty thousand francs together in the course of the morning. There had been gaming debts, and carriage-builders’ accounts, money lost to Heaven knows whom. My magician of a boon companion had impressed it upon me that she was rich enough to make good these reverses by a few years of economy. Only now did I begin to guess the reasons of his urgency. I confess, to my shame, that I had not the shadow of a doubt but that it was important that Daddy Gobseck should make it up with this dandy. I was dressing when the young gentleman appeared.

“‘M. le Comte,’ said I, after the usual greetings, ‘I fail to see why you should need me to effect an introduction to Van Gobseck, the most civil and smooth-spoken of capitalists. Money will be forthcoming if he has any, or rather, if you can give him adequate security.’

“‘Monsieur,’ said he, ‘it does not enter into my thoughts to force you to do me a service, even though you have passed your word.’

“‘Sardanapalus!’ said I to myself, ‘am I going to let that fellow imagine that I will not keep my word with him?’

“‘I had the honor of telling you yesterday,’ said he, ‘that I had fallen out with Daddy Gobseck most inopportunely; and as there is scarcely another man in Paris who can come down on the nail with a hundred thousand francs, at the end of the month, I begged of you to make my peace with him. But let us say no more about it—’”

M. de Trailles looked at me with civil insult, and made as if to take his leave.

“‘I am ready to go with you,’ said I.

“When we reached the Rue de Gres, my dandy looked about him with a circumspection and uneasiness that set me wondering. His face grew livid, flushed, and yellow, turn and turn about, and by the time Gobseck’s door came in sight the perspiration stood in drops on his forehead. We were just getting out of the cabriolet, when a hackney cab turned into the street. My companion’s hawk eye detected a woman in the depths of the vehicle. His face lighted up with a gleam of almost savage joy; he called to a little boy who was passing, and gave him his horse to hold. Then we went up to the old bill discounter.

“‘M. Gobseck,’ said I, ‘I have brought one of my most intimate friends to see you (whom I trust as I would trust the Devil,’ I added for the old man’s private ear). ‘To oblige me you will do your best for him (at the ordinary rate), and pull him out of his difficulty (if it suits your convenience).’

“M. de Trailles made his bow to Gobseck, took a seat, and listened to us with a courtier-like attitude; its charming humility would have touched your heart to see, but my Gobseck sits in his chair by the fireside without moving a muscle, or changing a feature. He looked very like the statue of Voltaire under the peristyle of the Theatre-Francais; he had partly risen as if to bow, and the skull cap that covered the top of his head, and the narrow strip of sallow forehead exhibited, completed his likeness to the man of marble.

“‘I have no money to spare except for my own clients,’ said he.

“‘So you are cross because I may have tried in other quarters to ruin myself?’ laughed the Count.

“‘Ruin yourself!’ repeated Gobseck ironically.

“‘Were you about to remark that it is impossible to ruin a man who has nothing?’ inquired the dandy. ‘Why, I defy you to find a better _stock_ in Paris!’ he cried, swinging round on his heels.

“This half-earnest buffoonery produced not the slightest effect upon Gobseck.

“‘Am I not on intimate terms with the Ronquerolles, the Marsays, the Franchessinis, the two Vandenesses, the Ajuda-Pintos—all the most fashionable young men in Paris, in short? A prince and an ambassador (you know them both) are my partners at play. I draw my revenues from London and Carlsbad and Baden and Bath. Is not this the most brilliant of all industries!’

“‘True.’

“‘You make a sponge of me, begad! you do. You encourage me to go and swell myself out in society, so that you can squeeze me when I am hard up; but you yourselves are sponges, just as I am, and death will give you a squeeze some day.’

“‘That is possible.’

“‘If there were no spendthrifts, what would become of you? The pair of us are like soul and body.’

“‘Precisely so.’

“‘Come, now, give us your hand, Grandaddy Gobseck, and be magnanimous if this is “true” and “possible” and “precisely so.”’

“‘You come to me,’ the usurer answered coldly, ‘because Girard, Palma, Werbrust, and Gigonnet are full up of your paper; they are offering it at a loss of fifty per cent; and as it is likely they only gave you half the figure on the face of the bills, they are not worth five-and-twenty per cent of their supposed value. I am your most obedient! Can I in common decency lend a stiver to a man who owes thirty thousand francs, and has not one farthing?’ Gobseck continued. ‘The day before yesterday you lost ten thousand francs at a ball at the Baron de Nucingen’s.’

“‘Sir,’ said the Count, with rare impudence, ‘my affairs are no concern of yours,’ and he looked the old man up and down. ‘A man has no debts till payment is due.’

“‘True.’

“‘My bills will be duly met.’

“‘That is possible.’

“‘And at this moment the question between you and me is simply whether the security I am going to offer is sufficient for the sum I have come to borrow.’

“‘Precisely.’

“A cab stopped at the door, and the sound of wheels filled the room.

“‘I will bring something directly which perhaps will satisfy you,’ cried the young man, and he left the room.

“‘Oh! my son,’ exclaimed Gobseck, rising to his feet, and stretching out his arms to me, ‘if he has good security, you have saved my life. It would be the death of me. Werbrust and Gigonnet imagined that they were going to play off a trick on me; and now, thanks to you, I shall have a good laugh at their expense to-night.’

“There was something frightful about the old man’s ecstasy. It was the one occasion when he opened his heart to me; and that flash of joy, swift though it was, will never be effaced from my memory.

“‘Favor me so far as to stay here,’ he added. ‘I am armed, and a sure shot. I have gone tiger-hunting, and fought on the deck when there was nothing for it but to win or die; but I don’t care to trust yonder elegant scoundrel.’

“He sat down again in his armchair before his bureau, and his face grew pale and impassive as before.

“‘Ah!’ he continued, turning to me, ‘you will see that lovely creature I once told you about; I can hear a fine lady’s step in the corridor; it is she, no doubt;’ and, as a matter of fact, the young man came in with a woman on his arm. I recognized the Countess, whose levee Gobseck had described for me, one of old Goriot’s two daughters.

“The Countess did not see me at first; I stayed where I was in the window bay, with my face against the pane; but I saw her give Maxime a suspicious glance as she came into the money-lender’s damp, dark room. So beautiful she was, that in spite of her faults I felt sorry for her. There was a terrible storm of anguish in her heart; her haughty, proud features were drawn and distorted with pain she strove in vain to disguise. The young man had come to be her evil genius. I admired Gobseck, whose perspicacity had foreseen their future four years ago at the first bill she endorsed.

“‘Probably,’ said I to myself, ‘this monster with the angel face controls every possible spring of action in her: rules her through vanity, jealousy, pleasure, and the current of life in the world.’”

The Vicomtesse de Grandlieu broke in on the story.

“Why, the woman’s very virtues have been turned against her,” she exclaimed. “He has made her shed tears of devotion, and then abused her kindness and made her pay very dearly for unhallowed bliss.”

Derville did not understand the signs which Mme. de Grandlieu made to him.

“I confess,” he said, “that I had no inclination to shed tears over the lot of this unhappy creature, so brilliant in society, so repulsive to eyes that could read her heart; I shuddered rather at the sight of her murderer, a young angel with such a clear brow, such red lips and white teeth, such a winning smile. There they stood before their judge, he scrutinizing them much as some fifteenth-century Dominican inquisitor might have peered into the dungeons of the Holy Office while the torture was administered to two Moors.

“The Countess spoke tremulously. ‘Sir,’ she said, ‘is there any way of obtaining the value of these diamonds, and of keeping the right of repurchase?’ She held out a jewel-case.

“‘Yes, madame,’ I put in, and came forwards.

“She looked at me, and a shudder ran through her as she recognized me, and gave me the glance which means, ‘Say nothing of this,’ all the world over.

“‘This,’ said I, ‘constitutes a sale with faculty of redemption, as it is called, a formal agreement to transfer and deliver over a piece of property, either real estate or personalty, for a given time, on the expiry of which the previous owner recovers his title to the property in question, upon payment of a stipulated sum.’

“She breathed more freely. The Count looked black; he had grave doubts whether Gobseck would lend very much on the diamonds after such a fall in their value. Gobseck, impassive as ever, had taken up his magnifying glass, and was quietly scrutinizing the jewels. If I were to live for a hundred years, I should never forget the sight of his face at that moment. There was a flush in his pale cheeks; his eyes seemed to have caught the sparkle of the stones, for there was an unnatural glitter in them. He rose and went to the light, holding the diamonds close to his toothless mouth, as if he meant to devour them; mumbling vague words over them, holding up bracelets, sprays, necklaces, and tiaras one after another, to judge their water, whiteness, and cutting; taking them out of the jewel-case and putting them in again, letting the play of the light bring out all their fires. He was more like a child than an old man; or, rather, childhood and dotage seemed to meet in him.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“‘Fine stones! The set would have fetched three hundred thousand francs before the Revolution. What water! Genuine Asiatic diamonds from Golconda or Visapur. Do you know what they are worth? No, no; no one in Paris but Gobseck can appreciate them. In the time of the Empire such a set would have cost another two hundred thousand francs!’

He shrugged and added:

‘But now diamonds are going down in value every day. The Brazilians have swamped the market with them since the Peace; but the Indian stones are a better color. Others wear them now besides court ladies. Does madame go to court?’

While he flung out these terrible words, he examined one stone after another with delight beyond description.

‘Flawless!’ he said. ‘Here is a speck!... here is a flaw!... A fine stone that!’

His haggard face was lighted up by the sparkling jewels, putting me in mind of a dingy inn mirror that receives every luminous image without reflecting the light; a traveler bold enough to look for his face beholds a man in an apoplectic fit.

‘Well?’ asked the Count, clapping Gobseck on the shoulder.

The old man trembled. He put down his playthings on his bureau, took his seat, and was a money-lender once more—hard, cold, and polished as a marble column.

‘How much do you want?’

‘One hundred thousand francs for three years,’ said the Count.

‘That is possible,’ said Gobseck, and from a mahogany box (Gobseck’s jewel-case) he drew out a faultlessly adjusted pair of scales!

He weighed the diamonds, calculating the value of stones and setting at sight (Heaven knows how!), delight and severity struggling in his face. The Countess had plunged into a stupor; watching her, I thought she was fathoming the abyss into which she had fallen. There was remorse still in her soul. Perhaps a hand held out in charity might save her. I would try.

‘Are the diamonds your personal property, madame?’ I asked in a clear voice.

‘Yes, monsieur,’ she said, looking at me with proud eyes.

‘Make out the deed of purchase with power of redemption, chatterbox,’ said Gobseck to me, resigning his chair at the bureau in my favor.

‘Madame is without doubt a married woman?’ I tried again.

She nodded abruptly.

‘Then I will not draw up the deed,’ said I.

‘And why not?’ asked Gobseck.

‘Why not?’ I echoed, drawing the old man into the bay window to speak aside. ‘This woman is under her husband’s control; the agreement would be void in law; you could not assert ignorance of a fact recorded on the face of the document. You would be compelled at once to produce the diamonds deposited with you, according to the weight, value, and cutting described.’

Gobseck cut me short with a nod, and turned to the guilty couple.

‘He is right!’ he said. ‘That puts the whole thing in a different light. Eighty thousand francs down, and you leave the diamonds with me,’ he added in his husky, flute-like voice. ‘In property, possession is as good as a title.’

‘But----’ objected the young man.

‘You can take it or leave it,’ continued Gobseck, returning the jewel-case to the lady as he spoke.

‘I have too many risks to run.’

‘It would be better to throw yourself at your husband’s feet,’ I bent to whisper to her.

The usurer must have read my lips. He gave me a cool glance. The Count’s face grew livid. The Countess visibly wavered. Maxime stepped up to her, and, low as he spoke, I caught: ‘Adieu, dear Anastasie, may you be happy! As for me, by to-morrow my troubles will be over.’

‘Sir!’ cried the lady, turning to Gobseck. ‘I accept your offer.’

‘Come, now,’ returned Gobseck. ‘You have been a long time in coming to it, my fair lady.’

He wrote a cheque for fifty thousand francs on the Bank of France, and handed it to the Countess.

‘Now,’ continued he with a smile like M. Voltaire’s portraits, ‘now I will give you the rest in bills, thirty thousand francs’ worth of paper as good as bullion. This gentleman here has just said, “My bills will be met when they are due,”’ added he, producing certain drafts bearing the Count’s signature, all protested the day before at the request of some confraternity, who had probably made them over to him (Gobseck) at a reduced figure.

The young man growled something, the words ‘Old scoundrel!’ audible. Daddy Gobseck did not move an eyebrow. He drew a pair of pistols from a pigeon-hole, remarking coolly:

‘As the insulted man, I fire first.’

‘Maxime, you owe this gentleman an explanation,’ cried the trembling Countess.

‘I had no intention of giving offence,’ stammered Maxime.

‘I am quite sure of that,’ Gobseck answered calmly; ‘you had no intention of meeting your bills, that was all.’

The Countess rose, bowed, and vanished, dread gnawing her. M. de Trailles was bound to follow, but before he went he managed to say:

‘If either of you gentlemen should forget himself, I will have his blood, or he will have mine.’

‘Amen!’ called Daddy Gobseck as he put his pistols back; ‘but a man must have blood in his veins before he can risk it, my son, and you have nothing but mud in yours.’

When the door closed and the vehicles left, Gobseck rose and began to prance about.

‘I have the diamonds! I have the diamonds!’ he cried again and again, ‘the beautiful diamonds! such diamonds! and tolerably cheaply. Aha! aha! Werbrust and Gigonnet, you thought you had old Papa Gobseck! Ego sum papa! I am master of the lot of you! Paid! paid, principal and interest! How silly they will look to-night when I come out with this story between two games of dominoes!’

The dark glee, the savage ferocity aroused by the possession of a few water-white pebbles set me shuddering. I was dumb with amazement.

‘Aha! There you are, my boy!’ said he. ‘We will dine together. We will have some fun at your place, for I haven’t a home of my own, and these restaurants, with their broths, sauces, and wines, would poison the Devil himself.’

Something in my face brought back the usual cold, impassive expression to his.

‘You don’t understand it,’ he said, and sitting by the hearth, he put a tin saucepan of milk on the brazier. ‘Will you breakfast with me?’ continued he. ‘Perhaps there will be enough here for two.’

‘Thanks,’ said I, ‘I do not breakfast till noon.’

I had scarcely spoken when hurried footsteps sounded in the passage. The stranger stopped at Gobseck’s door and rapped; there was a knock of a man transported with rage. Gobseck reconnoitred him through the grating; then he opened the door, and in came a man of thirty-five or so, harmless in appearance despite his anger. The newcomer, plainly dressed, bore a strong resemblance to the late Duc de Richelieu. You must often have met him; he was the Countess’ husband, a man with the aristocratic figure peculiar to statesmen of your faubourg.

‘Sir,’ said this person to Gobseck, ‘did my wife go out of this house just now?’

‘That is possible.’

‘Well, sir? do you not take my meaning?’

‘I have not the honor of the acquaintance of my lady your wife,’ returned Gobseck. ‘I have had a good many visitors this morning, women and men, mannish young ladies, and young gentlemen who look like young ladies. I should find it very hard to say----’

‘A truce to jesting, sir! I mean the woman who has this moment gone out from you.’

‘How can I know whether she is your wife or not? I never had the pleasure of seeing you before.’

‘You are mistaken, M. Gobseck,’ said the Count, with profound irony. ‘We have met before, one morning in my wife’s bedroom. You had come to demand payment for a bill—no bill of hers.’

‘It was no business of mine to inquire what value she had received for it,’ said Gobseck, with a malignant look at the Count. ‘I had come by the bill in the way of business. At the same time, monsieur,’ continued Gobseck, quietly pouring coffee into his bowl of milk, without a trace of excitement, ‘you will permit me to observe that your right to enter my house and expostulate with me is far from proven to my mind. I came of age in the sixty-first year of the preceding century.’

‘Sir,’ said the Count, ‘you have just bought family diamonds, which do not belong to my wife, for a mere trifle.’

‘Without feeling it incumbent upon me to tell you my private affairs, I will tell you this much, M. le Comte—if Mme. la Comtesse has taken your diamonds, you should have sent a circular to all jewelers, giving notice not to buy them; she might have sold them separately.’

‘You know my wife, sir!’ roared the Count.

‘True.’

‘She is in her husband’s power.’

‘That is possible.’

‘She had no right to dispose of those diamonds----’

‘Precisely.’

‘Very well, sir?’

‘Very well, sir. I knew your wife, and she is in her husband’s power; I am quite willing—she is in the power of a good many people; but—I—do—not—know—your diamonds. If Mme. la Comtesse can put her name to a bill, she can go into business, of course, and buy and sell diamonds on her own account. The thing is plain on the face of it!’

‘Good-day, sir!’ cried the Count, now white with rage. ‘There are courts of justice.’

‘Quite so.’

‘This gentleman here,’ he added, indicating me, ‘was a witness of the sale.’

‘That is possible.’

The Count turned to go. Feeling the gravity, I suddenly interposed.

‘M. le Comte,’ said I, ‘you are right, and M. Gobseck is by no means in the wrong. You could not prosecute the purchaser without bringing your wife into court, and the odium would not fall on her alone. I am an attorney, and I owe it to myself, and to my professional position, to declare that the diamonds you speak of were purchased by M. Gobseck in my presence; but, in my opinion, it would be unwise to dispute the legality of the sale, especially as the goods are not readily recognizable. In equity our contention would lie, in law it would collapse. M. Gobseck is too honest a man to deny that the sale was profitable, more especially as my conscience, no less than my duty, compels me to make the admission. But once in a court, M. le Comte, the issue would be doubtful. My advice is to come to terms with M. Gobseck, who can plead that he bought the diamonds in good faith; you would be bound in any case to return the purchase money. Consent to an arrangement, with power to redeem at the end of seven or eight months, or a year even, or any convenient lapse of time for the repayment of the sum borrowed by Mme. la Comtesse, unless you prefer to repurchase them outright and give security for repayment.’

Gobseck dipped his bread into the bowl of coffee, and ate with perfect indifference; but at the words ‘come to terms,’ he looked at me as who should say, ‘A fine fellow that! he has learned something from my lessons!’ I, for my part, riposted with a glance he understood. The business was dubious; there was pressing need of terms. Gobseck could not deny knowledge, for I should appear as a witness. The Count thanked me with a smile of good will.

In the debate which followed, Gobseck showed greed and skill enough to baffle a congress of diplomatists; but in the end I drew up an instrument in which the Count acknowledged receipt of eighty-five thousand francs, interest included, in consideration of which Gobseck undertook to return the diamonds to the Count.

‘What waste!’ exclaimed he as he signed. ‘How is it possible to bridge such a gulf?’

‘Have you many children, sir?’ Gobseck asked gravely.

The Count winced; the old usurer, like an experienced physician, had put his finger at once on the sore spot. The Comtesse’s husband did not reply.

‘Well,’ said Gobseck, taking the pained silence for answer, ‘I know your story by heart. The woman is a fiend, but perhaps you love her still; I can well believe it; she made an impression on me. Perhaps, too, you would rather save your fortune and keep it for one or two of your children? Well, fling yourself into the whirlpool of society, lose that fortune at play, come to Gobseck pretty often. The world will say that I am a Jew, a Tartar, a usurer, a pirate, will say that I have ruined you! I snap my fingers at them! If anybody insults me, I lay my man out; nobody is a surer shot nor handles a rapier better than your servant. And every one knows it. Then, have a friend—if you can find one—and make over your property to him by a fictitious sale. You call that a fidei commissum, don’t you?’ he asked, turning to me.

The Count seemed absorbed in thought.

‘You shall have your money to-morrow,’ he said, ‘have the diamonds in readiness,’ and he went.

‘There goes one who looks to me to be as stupid as an honest man,’ Gobseck said coolly when the Count had gone.

‘Say rather stupid as a man of passionate nature.’

‘The Count owes you your fee for drawing up the agreement!’ Gobseck called after me as I took my leave.

One morning, a few days after the scene that initiated me into the terrible depths beneath a woman of fashion’s life, the Count came into my private office.

‘I have come to consult you on a matter of grave moment,’ he said, ‘and I begin by telling you that I have perfect confidence in you, as I hope to prove. Your behavior to Mme. de Grandlieu is above all praise,’ the Count went on. (You see, madame, that you have paid me a thousand times over for a very simple matter.)

I bowed and replied that I had done nothing but the duty of an honest man.

‘Well,’ the Count went on, ‘I have made many inquiries about the singular personage to whom you owe your position. From all I learn, Gobseck is a philosopher of the Cynic school. What do you think of his probity?’

‘M. le Comte,’ said I, ‘Gobseck is my benefactor—at fifteen per cent,’ I added, laughing. ‘But his avarice does not authorize me to paint him to the life for a stranger.’

‘Speak out, sir. Your frankness cannot injure Gobseck or yourself. I do not expect to find an angel in a pawnbroker.’

‘Daddy Gobseck,’ I began, ‘is convinced of a principle he makes a rule: money is a commodity you may sell cheap or dear according to circumstances, with a clear conscience. A capitalist, by charging a high rate, becomes a secured partner by anticipation in his eyes. Apart from his peculiar financial views, I am persuaded that, out of his business, he is the most loyal and upright soul in Paris. There are two men in him; he is petty and great—a miser and a philosopher. If I were to die leaving a family, he would be the guardian I should appoint. This was how I came to see Gobseck; I know nothing of his past life. He may have been a pirate, trafficked in diamonds, men, women, or State secrets; but this I affirm—never has human soul been more thoroughly tempered. When I paid off my loan, I asked him, with little circumlocution, why he made me pay such exorbitant interest; and why, seeing I was a friend, he should not have yielded. “My son,” he said, “I released you from all need to feel any gratitude by giving you ground for the belief that you owed me nothing.” So we are the best friends in the world. That answer gives you the man better than description.’

‘I have made up my mind once and for all,’ said the Count. ‘Draw up the necessary papers; I am going to transfer my property to Gobseck. I have no one but you to trust in the draft of the counter-deed, which will declare that this transfer is a simulated sale, and that Gobseck as trustee will administer my estate, and undertakes to make over my fortune to my eldest son when he comes of age. Now, sir, this I must tell you: I should be afraid to have that precious document in my own keeping. My boy is so fond of his mother, that I cannot trust him with it. So dare I beg you to keep it for me? In case of death, Gobseck would make you legatee of my property. Every contingency is provided for.’

The Count paused, greatly agitated.

‘A thousand pardons,’ he said; ‘I am in great pain and have grave misgivings as to my health. Recent troubles have disturbed me painfully, and forced me to take this great step.’

‘Allow me first to thank you, monsieur,’ said I, ‘for the trust you place in me. But I must deserve it by pointing out that you are disinheriting your other children. They bear your name. Merely as the children of a once-loved wife, now fallen, they have a claim to an assured existence. I tell you plainly I cannot accept the trust unless their future is secured.’

The Count trembled and tears came into his eyes as he grasped my hand. ‘I did not know my man thoroughly. You have made me both glad and sorry. We will make provision for the children in the counter-deed.’

I went with him to the door; it seemed there was a glow of satisfaction on his face at the thought of this act of justice.

Now, Camille, this is how a young wife takes the first step to the brink. A quadrille, a ballad, a picnic is sometimes cause of frightful evils. You are hurried on by the presumptuous voice of vanity and pride, on the faith of a smile, or through giddiness and folly! Shame and misery and remorse are three Furies awaiting every woman who oversteps limits.

‘Poor Camille can hardly keep awake,’ the Vicomtesse hastily broke in. ‘Go to bed, child; you have no need of appalling pictures to keep you pure.’

Camille de Grandlieu took the hint and went.

‘You were going rather too far, dear M. Derville,’ said the Vicomtesse, ‘an attorney is not a mother of daughters nor yet a preacher.’

‘But any newspaper is a thousand times----’

‘Poor Derville!’ exclaimed the Vicomtesse, ‘what has come over you? Do you really imagine that I allow a daughter of mine to read the newspapers?—Go on,’ she added after a pause.

Three months after everything was signed and sealed between the Count and Gobseck—

‘You can call him the Comte de Restaud, now that Camille is not here,’ said the Vicomtesse.

So be it. Time went by, and I saw nothing of the counter-deed, which by rights should have been in my hands. An attorney in Paris lives in such a whirl of business that, with certain exceptions, we cannot give each client the interest they take in their affairs. Still, one day when Gobseck dined with me, I asked as we left the table if he knew why I had heard no more of M. de Restaud.

‘There are excellent reasons for that,’ he said; ‘the noble Count is at death’s door. He is one of the soft stamp that cannot learn how to put an end to chagrin and allow it to wear them out. Life is a craft, a profession; every man must take the trouble to learn that business. When he has learned what life is by painful experiences, his fibre is toughened; he disciplines himself till his nerves are like steel springs—they bend, but never break; given a sound digestion, a man in such training ought to live as long as the cedars of Lebanon, and famous trees they are.’

‘Then is the Count actually dying?’ I asked.

‘That is possible,’ said Gobseck; ‘the winding up of his estate will be a juicy bit of business for you.’

I looked at him and said, to sound him:

‘Just explain to me how it is that we, the Count and I, are the only men in whom you take an interest?’

‘Because you are the only two who have trusted me without finessing,’ he said.

Although this warranted belief that Gobseck would act fairly even if the counter-deed were lost, I resolved to see the Count. I pleaded a business engagement, and we separated.

I went straight to the Rue du Helder, and was shown into a room where the Countess sat playing with her children. When she heard my name, she sprang up and pointed to a chair by the fire. Her face wore the inscrutable mask beneath which women of the world conceal their most vehement emotions. Trouble had withered that face already. Nothing of its beauty remained save the marvelous outlines of its charm.

‘It is essential, madame, that I should speak to M. le Comte----’

‘If so, you would be more favored than I am,’ she said, interrupting me. ‘M. de Restaud will see no one. He will hardly allow his doctor to come, and will not be nursed even by me. When people are ill, they have such strange fancies! They are like children, they do not know what they want.’

‘Perhaps, like children, they know very well what they want.’

The Countess reddened. I almost repented a thrust worthy of Gobseck. To change the subject I added, ‘But M. de Restaud cannot possibly lie there alone all day, madame.’

‘His oldest boy is with him,’ she said.

It was useless to gaze at the Countess; she did not blush this time, and it seemed she resolved more firmly than ever that I should not penetrate her secrets.

‘You must understand, madame, that my proceeding is no way indiscreet. It is strongly to his interest—’ I bit my lips, feeling I had gone the wrong way. The Countess took advantage of my slip.

‘My interests are in no way separate from my husband’s, sir,’ said she. ‘There is nothing to prevent your addressing yourself to me—’

‘The business which brings me here concerns no one but M. le Comte,’ I said firmly.

‘The thing which brings me here concerns no one but M. le Comte,’ was her tone.

I chatted on about indifferent matters to study her; like all women who have plotted, she could dissimulate with rare perfection; she might do anything. I left.

Now, I pass to the final scenes of this adventure, adding a few circumstances brought to light by time, and some details guessed by Gobseck’s perspicacity or my own.

When the Comte de Restaud plunged into dissipation, something passed between husband and wife, an impenetrable secret, but the wife sank lower in the husband’s eyes. As soon as he became so ill he had to take to his bed, he manifested aversion for the Countess and the two youngest children. He forbade them to enter his room, and disobedience brought on dangerous attacks; the doctor implored the Countess to submit.

Mme. de Restaud had seen family estates and property, even the mansion, pass into Gobseck’s hands, who played the fantastic ogre regarding their wealth. She partially understood what her husband was doing. M. de Trailles had traveled to England, and no one could enlighten the lady that her husband was taking precautions against her at Gobseck’s suggestion. It is said she held out a long while before signing the necessary papers; nevertheless the Count gained his point. The Countess believed her husband was realizing his fortune, and that somewhere there would be a bunch of notes representing the amount; perhaps deposited with a notary, or at the bank, or in some safe hiding-place. She reasoned that M. de Restaud must have some document by which any remaining property could be recovered and handed to his son.

So she kept strict watch over the sick-room. She ruled despotically in the house, everything submitted to feminine espionage. All day she sat in the salon adjoining his room so she could hear every syllable and movement. She had a bed put there, but slept little. The doctor was in her interests. Such wifely devotion seemed praiseworthy. With the subtlety of perfidy, she disguised M. de Restaud’s repugnance and feigned distress so perfectly she gained a sort of celebrity. Always before her eyes she beheld a vision of destitution to follow her husband’s death should her presence fail; in these ways the wife, repulsed from the bed of pain, had drawn a charmed circle round it. So near, yet kept at a distance; all-powerful, but in disgrace, she lay in wait for death and opportunity; crouching like an ant-lion at the bottom of his spiral pit, ever on the watch for prey, listening to the fall of every grain of sand.

The strictest censor must recognize that the Countess pushed maternal sentiment to the last degree. Her father’s death had been a lesson. She worshiped her children. They were so young she could hide her disorders and win their love; she had given them the best education. I confess I cannot help admiring her and feeling sorry. Gobseck joked me about it. She had discovered Maxime’s baseness and was expiating past sins in tears. I was sure of it. Hateful as were the measures she took to regain control of her husband’s money, were they not the result of a mother’s love and a desire to repair wrongs done her children? Perhaps she only learned the worth of a virtuous life when she reaped the woeful harvest sown by her errors.

Every time little Ernest came out of his father’s room, she put him through a searching examination as to what his father had done or said. The boy complied and told her more than she asked.

My visit was a ray of light for the Countess. She resolved to see in me the instrument of the Count’s vengeance, and that I should not be allowed near the dying man. I augured ill, and earnestly wished for an interview, for I was uneasy about the counter-deed. If it fell into the Countess’ hands she might turn it to her account, beginning interminable lawsuits with Gobseck. I knew the usurer well enough to feel convinced he would never give up the property; there was room for legal quibbling over a series of transfers, and I alone knew the ins and outs. I intended to prevent a tissue of misfortune, so I went to the Countess a second time.

‘I have noticed,’ said Derville, turning to the Vicomtesse, ‘certain moral phenomena we do not heed. I am an observer of human nature, and bring analysis to business that stirs human passions. Two antagonists almost always divine each other’s thoughts. Two enemies sometimes read each other’s minds as lovers read souls. So when we came together, the Countess and I, I understood at once the reason of her antipathy, disguised though it was. I had been forced to be her confidant, and a woman cannot but hate the man before whom she is compelled to blush. She knew that if I was her husband’s trusted man, that husband had not as yet given up his fortune.

I will spare you the conversation; it abides in memory as one of the most dangerous encounters in my career. Nature had bestowed on her qualities which combined made her irresistibly fascinating; she could be pliant and proud, confiding and coaxing; she even tried to subjugate me. It was a failure. As I left, I caught a gleam of hate and rage in her eyes that made me shudder. We parted enemies. She would fain have crushed me; I felt pity, and for some natures pity is the deadliest insult. This feeling pervaded my last representations to her; when I left, I think I left dread in her soul by declaring that, turn which way she would, ruin lay inevitably before her.

‘If I were to see M. le Comte, your children’s property at any rate would----’

‘I should be at your mercy,’ she said, breaking in, disgust in her gesture.

Now that we had spoken frankly, I resolved to save the family from impending destitution. I strained the law to gain my ends. I sued the Comte de Restaud for a sum ostensibly due to Gobseck, and gained judgment. The Countess, of course, did not allow him to know, but I had a right to affix seals on his death. I bribed a servant—he undertook to let me know at any hour if his master was at the point of death, so I could intervene at once, scare the Countess with a threat of affixing seals, and secure the counter-deed.

I learned later that the woman studied the Code with her husband’s dying moans in her ears. If we could picture the thoughts of those about a deathbed, what fearful sights would appear! Money is always the motive-spring. Let us leave these nauseating details; perhaps they give insight into all this husband and wife endured and unveil much that passes in secret in other houses.

For two months the Comte de Restaud lay on his bed, alone and resigned. Mortal disease slowly sapped strength of mind and body. Unaccountable sick fancies preyed on him; he would not have his room set in order, no one could nurse him, he would not allow his bed to be made. All bore marks of apathy; furniture was out of place, trifles covered with dust and cobwebs. In health a man of refined taste, he now delighted in the comfortless look. Rows of medicine bottles, crumpled linen, and broken plates littered the writing-table, chairs, and chimney-piece. A warming-pan lay before the grate; a bath of mineral water had not been taken away. Signs of death appeared in inanimate things before the Destroyer came to the body. The Comte could not bear daylight; Venetian shutters were closed; darkness deepened the gloom. He had wasted greatly; life seemed to have taken refuge in brilliant eyes. The livid whiteness of his face was horrible, enhanced by long damp locks he never had cut. He looked like a religious fanatic in the desert. Mental suffering was extinguishing all human instincts in this man of scarce fifty, whom Paris had known as brilliant and successful.

One morning at the beginning of December 1824, he looked up at Ernest, who sat at the foot of his bed.

‘Are you in pain?’ the little Vicomte asked.

‘No,’ said the Count, with a ghastly smile, ‘it all lies here and about my heart!’

He pointed to his forehead, then laid his wasted fingers on his hollow chest. Ernest began to cry.

‘How is it that M. Derville does not come to me?’ the Count asked his servant—he thought Maurice attached, but the man was entirely in the Countess’ interest—‘What! Maurice!’ The dying man suddenly sat upright and seemed to recover presence of mind. ‘I have sent for my attorney seven or eight times during the last fortnight, and he does not come!’ he cried. ‘Do you imagine I am to be trifled with? Go for him at once, this very instant, and bring him back. If you do not carry out my orders, I shall get up and go myself.’

‘Madame,’ said the man as he came into the salon, ‘you heard M. le Comte; what ought I to do?’

‘Pretend to go to the attorney, and when you come back tell your master that his man of business is forty leagues away on an important lawsuit. Say he is expected home at the end of the week.—Sick people never know how ill they are,’ thought the Countess; ‘he will wait till the man comes home.’

The doctor had said on the previous evening that the Count could scarcely live through the day. When the servant returned two hours later with that hopeless answer, the dying man seemed greatly agitated.

‘Oh God!’ he cried again and again, ‘I put my trust in none but Thee.’

For a long while he lay and gazed at his son, and spoke in a feeble voice.

‘Ernest, my boy, you are very young; but you have a good heart; you can understand, no doubt, that a promise given to a dying man is sacred; a promise to a father... Do you feel you can be trusted with a secret, and keep it so well and closely that even your mother shall not know you have a secret? There is no one else in this house whom I can trust to-day. You will not betray me, will you?’

‘No, father.’

‘Very well, then, Ernest, in a minute I will give you a sealed packet that belongs to M. Derville; you must take such care that no one knows you have it; then you must slip out and post the letter at the corner.’

‘Yes, father.’

‘Can I depend upon you?’

‘Yes, father.’

‘Come and kiss me. You have made death less bitter. In six or seven years you will understand the importance of this secret, and you will be well rewarded then. Leave me alone for a minute, and let no one—no matter whom—come in meanwhile.’

Ernest went out and saw his mother in the next room.

‘Ernest,’ said she, ‘come here.’

She sat him on her knee and clasped him tightly.

‘Ernest, your father said something to you just now.’

‘Yes, mamma.’

‘What did he say?’

‘I cannot repeat it, mamma.’

‘Oh, my dear child!’ cried the Countess, kissing him. ‘You have kept your secret; how glad that makes me! Never tell a lie; never fail to keep your word—these are principles that should never be forgotten.’

‘Oh! mamma, how beautiful you are! You have never told a lie, I am quite sure.’

‘Once or twice, Ernest dear, I have lied. Yes, and I have not kept my word under circumstances which speak louder than precepts. Listen, my Ernest, you are big enough and intelligent enough to see that your father drives me away, and will not allow me to nurse him, and this is not natural, for you know how much I love him.’

‘Yes, mamma.’

The Count had opened the door and stood there, a sudden, half-naked apparition, almost as thin and fleshless as a skeleton.

His smothered cry produced a terrible effect upon the Countess; she sat motionless, as if a stupor had seized her. His face, working with last emotions, was almost hideous.

‘You have filled my life to the full with trouble, and now you are trying to vex my deathbed, to warp my boy’s mind, and make a depraved man of him!’ he cried, hoarsely.

The Countess flung herself at his feet. His face was as white and wasted as if he had risen from his grave.

‘Mercy! mercy!’ she cried aloud, shedding torrents of tears.

‘Have you shown me any pity?’ he asked. ‘I allowed you to squander your own money, and now do you mean to squander my fortune, and ruin my son?’

‘Ah! well, yes, have no pity for me, be merciless to me!’ she cried. ‘But the children? Condemn your widow to live in a convent; I will obey you; I will do anything to expiate the wrong I have done you, if that the children may be happy! The children! Oh, the children!’

‘I have only one child,’ said the Count, stretching out a wasted arm towards his son.

‘Pardon a penitent woman!...’ wailed the Countess, her arms about her husband’s damp feet. She could not speak for sobbing.

‘You dare to talk of penitence after all that you said to Ernest!’ exclaimed the dying man, shaking off the Countess. ‘You turn me to ice!’ he added, and there was something appalling in the indifference with which he spoke. ‘You have been a bad daughter; you have been a bad wife; you will be a bad mother.’

The wretched woman fainted. The dying man reached his bed and lay down again, and a few hours later sank into unconsciousness. The priests came and administered the sacraments.

At midnight he died; the scene that morning had exhausted him, and on the stroke of midnight I arrived with Daddy Gobseck. The house was in confusion; under cover of it we walked into the little salon adjoining the death-chamber. The three children were there in tears, with two priests who had come to watch. Ernest came over to me and said his mother desired to be alone in the Count’s room.

‘Do not go in,’ he said; and I admired the child for his tone; ‘she is praying there.’

Gobseck began to laugh that soundless laugh, but I felt too much touched by Ernest’s face to join in the miser’s amusement. When Ernest saw we moved toward the door, he planted himself in front of it, crying out, ‘Mamma, here are some gentlemen in black who want to see you!’

Gobseck lifted Ernest as if the child were a feather, and opened the door.

What met our eyes was a scene! The room was in frightful disorder; clothes and papers lay tossed in confusion; the Countess stood disheveled, unable to speak, her eyes glittering. The Count had scarcely breathed his last before his wife forced open drawers and desk; the carpet was strewn, some furniture and boxes broken—the signs of violence were everywhere. If her search had at first proved fruitless, there was that in her excitement which led me to believe she had found the mysterious documents at last. I glanced at the bed; the mattress had been flung down and across it, face downwards, lay the Count’s body—he too was nothing now but an envelope. There was something grotesquely horrible in his attitude.

The dying man must have hidden the counter-deed under his pillow to keep it safe so long as life lasted; his wife must have guessed; it might be read in his last gesture, the convulsive clutch of his hands. The pillow lay on the floor at the foot of the bed; I could see the print of her heel upon it. At her feet lay a paper with the Count’s arms on the seals; I snatched it up and saw it was addressed to me. I looked steadily at the Countess with the pitiless clear-sightedness of an examining magistrate confronting a guilty creature. The contents were blazing in the grate; she had flung them on the fire at our approach, imagining, from a hasty glance at my provisions for her children, that she was destroying a will which disinherited them. Tormented conscience and involuntary horror had taken away all power of reflection. She had been caught in the act, and possibly the scaffold was rising before her eyes.

There she stood gasping, waiting for us.

I went to the grate and pulled out an unburned fragment. ‘Ah, madame!’ I exclaimed, ‘you have ruined your children! Those papers were their titles to their property.’

Her mouth twitched; she looked threatened by a paralytic seizure.

‘Eh! eh!’ cried Gobseck; the harsh tone grated.

There was a pause, then the old man turned to me and said quietly:

‘Do you intend Mme. la Comtesse to suppose that I am not the rightful owner of the property sold to me by her late husband? This house belongs to me now.’

A sudden blow on the head would have given me less pain and astonishment. The Countess saw the hesitation in my face.

‘Monsieur,’ she cried, ‘Monsieur!’

‘You are a trustee, are you not?’ I asked.

‘That is possible.’

‘Then do you mean to take advantage of this crime of hers?’

‘Precisely.’

I went at that, leaving the Countess sitting by her husband’s bedside, shedding hot tears. Gobseck followed. Outside in the street I separated from him, but he came after me, flung one of those searching glances with which he probed men’s minds, and said in husky flute-tones pitched higher:

‘Do you take it upon yourself to judge me?’

From that time we saw little of each other. Gobseck let the Count’s mansion on lease; he spent summers on the country estates. He was a lord of the manor in earnest, putting up farm buildings, repairing mills and roadways, and planting timber. I came across him one day in the Jardin des Tuileries.

‘The Countess is behaving like a heroine,’ said I; ‘she gives herself up entirely to the children’s education; she is giving them a perfect bringing up. The oldest boy is a charming young fellow—’

‘That is possible.’

‘But ought you not to help Ernest?’ I suggested.

‘Help him!’ cried Gobseck. ‘Not I. Adversity is the greatest of all teachers; adversity teaches the value of money and the worth of men and women. Let him set sail on the seas of Paris; when he is a qualified pilot, we will give him a ship to steer.’

I left him without seeking to explain his words.

M. de Restaud’s mother had prejudiced him against me, and he was far from taking me as his legal adviser; still, I went to see Gobseck last week to tell him about Ernest’s love for Mlle. Camille, and pressed him to carry out his contract, since young Restaud is now of age.

I found the old bill-discounter kept to his bed for a long time by the complaint of which he was to die. He put me off, saying he would give the matter his attention when he could get up and see after his business; his idea no doubt was that he would not give up possessions while breath was in him. He seemed much worse than he suspected. I stayed long enough to discern the progress of a passion age had converted into a sort of craze. He wanted to be alone in the house, and had taken rooms one by one as they fell vacant. In his own room he had changed nothing; the furniture which I knew sixteen years ago looked the same; it might have been kept under glass. Gobseck’s faithful old portress, with her pensioner husband who sat in the entry, was still his housekeeper and charwoman, and now his sick-nurse. In spite of feebleness, Gobseck saw clients as before, and received sums; his affairs had been simplified so he only needed to send his pensioner on errands and could carry on business in bed.

After the treaty by which France recognized the Haytian Republic, Gobseck was on the commission appointed to liquidate claims and assess repayments due by Hayti; his knowledge of old fortunes in San Domingo and the planters and their heirs had led to his nomination. Gobseck’s genius devised an agency for discounting planters’ claims on the government. The business ran under Werbrust and Gigonnet, with whom he shared spoil without disbursements, for his knowledge was accepted instead of capital. The agency was a distillery, extracting money from dubious claims, and the claims of those who preferred a little ready money to deferred repayment. As a liquidator, Gobseck made terms with large landed proprietors; these, to gain a higher percentage or ensure prompt settlement, sent him presents in proportion to means. Presents became a kind of percentage on sums too large to pass through him. The agency bought small and dubious claims cheaply. Gobseck was the insatiable boa constrictor. Every morning he received tribute, eyeing it like a Nabob’s prime minister considering whether to sign a pardon. Gobseck would take anything, from game or wax candles from devout folk, to a rich man’s plate and a speculator’s gold snuff-box. Nobody knew what became of the presents. Everything went in, but nothing came out.

‘On the word of an honest woman,’ said the portress, an old acquaintance, ‘I believe he swallows it all and is none the fatter for it; he is as thin and dried up as the cuckoo in the clock.’

At length, last Monday, Gobseck sent his pensioner for me. The man came to my private office.

‘Be quick and come, M. Derville,’ said he, ‘the governor is just going to hand in his checks; he has grown as yellow as a lemon; he is fidgeting to speak with you; death has fair hold of him; the rattle is working in his throat.’

When I entered Gobseck’s room, I found the dying man kneeling before the grate. If there was no fire, there was at least a monstrous heap of ashes. He had dragged himself out of bed, but strength failed him; he could neither go back nor find the voice to complain.

‘You felt cold, old friend,’ I said, helping him back to bed; ‘how can you do without a fire?’

‘I am not cold at all,’ he said. ‘No fire here! no fire! I am going, I know not where, lad,’ he went on, glancing at me with blank eyes, ‘but I am going away from this.—I have carpology,’ said he (the term showing how accurate his mental processes were). ‘I thought the room was full of live gold, and I got up to catch some of it.—To whom will all mine go, I wonder? Not to the crown; I have left a will, look for it, Grotius. La belle Hollandaise had a daughter; I once saw the girl somewhere in the Rue Vivienne, one evening. They call her “La Torpille,” I believe; she is as pretty as pretty can be; look her up, Grotius. You are my executor; take what you like; help yourself. There are Strasburg pies, and bags of coffee, and sugar, and gold spoons. Give the Odiot service to your wife. But who is to have the diamonds? Are you going to take them, lad? There is snuff too—sell it at Hamburg, tobaccos are worth half as much again at Hamburg. All sorts of things I have and now I must go and leave them all.—Come, Papa Gobseck, no weakness, be yourself!’

He raised himself in bed, lines of his face standing out sharply; he stretched a lean arm and bony hand along the coverlet and clutched it, as if to keep hold of life, then he gazed hard at the grate, cold as his metallic eyes, and died in full consciousness. To us—the portress, the old pensioner, and myself—he looked like one of the old Romans behind the Consuls in Lethière’s Death of the Sons of Brutus.

‘He was a good-plucked one, the old Lascar!’ said the pensioner.

But as for me, the dying man’s fantastical enumeration of riches still sounding, my eyes, following his direction, rested on that heap of ashes. It struck me that it was very large. I took the tongs, and as soon as I stirred the cinders, I felt metal underneath: a mass of gold and silver coins, receipts taken during his illness, doubtless, after he grew too feeble to lock money up and could trust no one to bank it.

‘Run for the justice of the peace,’ said I, turning to the old pensioner, ‘so everything can be sealed.’

Gobseck’s last words and the old portress’ remarks had struck me. I took the keys of the rooms on the first and second floors to make a visitation. The first door I opened revealed the meaning of phrases I took for mad ravings; I saw the length to which covetousness goes when it survives only as an illogical instinct—the last stage of greed in many misers.

In the room next to his, a quantity of eatables of all kinds were stored—putrid pies, mouldy fish, even shell-fish, the stench almost choking me. Maggots swarmed. These recent presents were put among chests of tea, bags of coffee, and packing-cases. A silver soup tureen on the chimney-piece was full of advices of goods consigned to his order at Havre: bales of cotton, hogsheads of sugar, barrels of rum, coffees, indigo, tobaccos—a perfect bazaar of colonial produce. The room itself was crammed with furniture, silver-plate, lamps, vases, pictures; books and curiosities and fine engravings lay rolled and unframed. Perhaps some of these were pledges left in default of payment. I noticed jewel-cases with ciphers and armorial bearings, and sets of fine linen, and weapons; none were docketed. I opened a misplaced book and found a thousand-franc note. I promised to go through everything thoroughly; I would try ceilings, floors, and walls to discover all the gold hoarded with passionate greed by a Dutch miser worthy of Rembrandt.

I went back to his room, and found an explanation of the chaos in a pile of letters under the paper-weights on his desk—Gobseck’s correspondence with dealers to whom he usually sold presents. These persons had perhaps fallen victims to his cleverness, or he wanted fancy prices; at any rate every bargain hung in suspense. He had not disposed of the eatables because Chevet would only take them at a loss of thirty per cent. Gobseck haggled a few francs; while they wrangled the goods became unsalable. Again, he had refused free delivery of his silver and declined to guarantee coffee weights. There had been a dispute over each article—the first sign of the childishness and incomprehensible obstinacy of age, a condition reached by strong passions surviving the intellect.

I said to myself, as he had said, ‘To whom will all these riches go?’ ... And then I think of the grotesque information he gave me about his heiress’s present address; I foresee it will be my duty to search all houses of ill-fame in Paris to pour out an immense fortune on some worthless jade. But, in the first place, know this—that in a few days Ernest de Restaud will come into a fortune to which his title is unquestionable, a fortune that will put him in a position to marry Mlle. Camille, even after adequate provision has been made for his mother the Comtesse de Restaud and his sister and brother.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Bidault (known as Gigonnet)
       The Government Clerks
       The Vendetta
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Daughter of Eve

     Derville
       A Start in Life
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Father Goriot
       Colonel Chabert
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Derville, Madame
       Cesar Birotteau

     Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van
       Father Goriot
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Government Clerks
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Gobseck, Sarah Van
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Maranas
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Member for Arcis

     Gobseck, Esther Van
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Grandlieu, Vicomtesse de
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Colonel Chabert

     Grandlieu, Vicomte Juste de
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Grandlieu, Vicomtesse Juste de
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       A Daughter of Eve

     Maurice (de Restaud’s valet)
       Father Goriot

     Palma (banker)
       The Firm of Nucingen
       Cesar Birotteau
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Ball at Sceaux

     Restaud, Comte de
       Father Goriot

     Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de
       Father Goriot

     Restaud, Ernest de
       The Member for Arcis

     Restaud, Madame Ernest de
       The Member for Arcis

     Restaud, Felix-Georges de
       The Member for Arcis

     Trailles, Comte Maxime de
       Cesar Birotteau
       Father Goriot
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Man of Business
       The Member for Arcis
       The Secrets of a Princess
       Cousin Betty
       The Member for Arcis
       Beatrix
       The Unconscious Humorists
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################