The incident recorded in this sketch took place in late November 1809, when Napoleon’s fugitive empire reached the height of its splendor. Wagram’s trumpets still echoed in Austria; peace was being signed with the Coalition. Kings and princes orbited Napoleon, dragging all Europe in his train — a spectacle later reaped at Dresden. Paris witnessed entertainments never more superb than those surrounding the sovereign’s marriage to an Austrian archduchess. Never, even in the Monarchy’s most splendid days, had so many crowned heads thronged the Seine; never had the French aristocracy been so rich or resplendent. The diamonds on women’s dresses and the gold and silver embroidery on uniforms contrasted sharply with Republic penury, making the wealth of the globe seem to roll through Paris drawing-rooms. Intoxication appeared to have turned the brains of this ephemeral Empire. The military, even their chief, reveled like parvenus in treasure won for them by a million men with worsted epaulettes, their demands answered by a few yards of red ribbon.

At this time most women affected the light morals of Louis XV’s reign. Whether imitating the fallen monarchy, or because certain Imperial family members set the example, as malcontents alleged, both sexes flung themselves into pleasure with an intrepidity that seemed to forebode the end. Another cause was women’s infatuation with the military, which became a frenzy consonant with the Emperor’s views, so he did not check it. Frequent calls to arms, which made every treaty an armistice, left passions exposed to endings as sudden as the Commander-in-chief’s decisions about busbys, pelisses, and aiguillettes that fascinated the fair sex. Hearts were as nomadic as the regiments. Between the first and fifth bulletins from the Grand Armée a woman might be successively mistress, wife, mother, and widow.

Was it the prospect of early widowhood, the hope of a jointure, the promise of a name in history, the certainty that the secret of their passions would be buried on the field, or the noble charm of courage that made soldiers attractive? Perhaps all these reasons, which future historians will weigh, contributed to their readiness to abandon themselves to intrigues. In any case, laurels hid many errors: women ardently preferred brave adventurers, whom they regarded as the fount of honor, wealth, or pleasure; for young girls an epaulette — the hieroglyphic of a future — signified happiness and liberty.

A feature of the period was an unbridled mania for everything glittering: fireworks and diamonds were prized above all. Men, as greedy as women for these translucent pebbles, displayed them lavishly. Possibly the need to carry plunder in portable form made gems fashionable in the army. A man was not ridiculous then, as he might be later, if his shirt-frill or fingers blazed with large diamonds. Murat, Oriental by nature, set the example of preposterous luxury to modern soldiers.

The Comte de Gondreville, formerly Citizen Malin, whose elevation had made him famous and who now lived as a Lucullus of the Conservative Senate, postponed an entertainment for the peace only to court Napoleon by trying to eclipse earlier flatterers. Ambassadors from friendly Powers, important personages, and even a few princes assembled in the wealthy senator’s drawing-rooms, eying favors to come. Dancing flagged; everyone watched for the Emperor, whose presence the Count had promised. Napoleon would have come but for a scene that evening with Josephine — the incident that foreshadowed the couple’s divorce. This episode, then secret but recorded by history, did not reach the courtiers and only kept Napoleon away.

The prettiest women in Paris, eager to attend on mere hearsay, besieged the house with luxury, coquetry, and beauty. The financial world, proud of its riches, challenged the splendor of generals and officials newly gorged with orders, titles, and honors. Wealthy families used these grand balls to introduce heiresses to Napoleon’s Praetorian Guard, foolishly hoping to exchange fortunes for uncertain favors. Women trusting beauty alone came to test their power. There, as elsewhere, amusement was a blind: calm, smiling faces and placid brows covered sordid interests; expressions of friendship were lies, and more than one man distrusted his friends more than his enemies.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
These remarks are necessary to explain the incidents of the little imbroglio which is the subject of this study, and to give a softened picture of the tone then dominant in Paris drawing-rooms.

“Turn your eyes a little towards the pedestal supporting that candelabrum—do you see a young lady with her hair drawn back a la Chinoise?—There, in the corner to the left; she has bluebells in the knot of chestnut curls on her head. Do you not see her? She is so pale you might fancy she was ill, delicate-looking, and very small; there—now she is turning her head this way; her almond-shaped blue eyes, so soft, look as if they were made for tears. Look, look! She is bending forward to see Madame de Vaudremont below the crowd of heads in constant motion; the high head-dresses prevent her having a clear view.”

“I see her now, my dear fellow. You had only to say that she had the whitest skin of all the women here; I should have known whom you meant. I had noticed her before; she has the loveliest complexion I ever admired. From hence I defy you to see against her throat the pearls between the sapphires of her necklace. But she is a prude or a coquette, for the tucker of her bodice scarcely lets one suspect the beauty of her bust. What shoulders! what lily-whiteness!”

“Who is she?” asked the first speaker.

“Ah! that I do not know.”

“Aristocrat!—Do you want to keep them all to yourself, Montcornet?”

“You of all men to banter me!” replied Montcornet, with a smile. “Do you think you have a right to insult a poor general like me because, being a happy rival of Soulanges, you cannot even turn on your heel without alarming Madame de Vaudremont? Or is it because I came only a month ago into the Promised Land? How insolent you can be, you men in office, who sit glued to your chairs while we are dodging shot and shell! Come, Monsieur le Maitre des Requetes, allow us to glean in the field of which you can only have precarious possession from the moment when we evacuate it. The deuce is in it! We have a right to live! My good friend, if you knew the German women, you would, I believe, do me a good turn with the Parisian you love best.”

“Well, General, since you have vouchsafed to turn your attention to that lady, whom I never saw till now, have the charity to tell me if you have seen her dance.”

“Why, my dear Martial, where have you dropped from? If you are ever sent with an embassy, I have small hopes of your success. Do not you see a triple rank of the most undaunted coquettes of Paris between her and the swarm of dancing men that buzz under the chandelier? And was it not only by the help of your eyeglass that you were able to discover her at all in the corner by that pillar, where she seems buried in the gloom, in spite of the candles blazing above her head? Between her and us there is such a sparkle of diamonds and glances, so many floating plumes, such a flutter of lace, of flowers and curls, that it would be a real miracle if any dancer could detect her among those stars. Why, Martial, how is it that you have not understood her to be the wife of some sous-prefet from Lippe or Dyle, who has come to try to get her husband promoted?”

“Oh, he will be!” exclaimed the Master of Appeals quickly.

“I doubt it,” replied the Colonel of Cuirassiers, laughing. “She seems as raw in intrigue as you are in diplomacy. I dare bet, Martial, that you do not know how she got into that place.”

The lawyer looked at the Colonel with an expression that mixed contempt and curiosity.

“Well,” proceeded Montcornet, “she arrived, I have no doubt, punctually at nine, the first perhaps, and probably she greatly embarrassed the Comtesse de Gondreville, who cannot put two ideas together. Repulsed by the mistress of the house, routed from chair to chair by each newcomer, and driven into the darkness of that little corner, she allowed herself to be walled in—the victim of the jealousy of the other ladies, who would gladly have buried that dangerous beauty. She had, of course, no friend to encourage her to maintain the place she first held in the front rank; then each of those treacherous fair ones would have enjoined on the men of her circle on no account to take out our poor friend, under pain of the severest punishment. That, my dear fellow, is the way in which those sweet faces, in appearance so tender and so artless, would have formed a coalition against the stranger, and that without a word beyond the question, ‘Tell me, dear, do you know that little woman in blue?’—Look here, Martial, if you care to run the gauntlet of more flattering glances and inviting questions than you will ever again meet in the whole of your life, just try to get through the triple rampart which defends that Queen of Dyle, or Lippe, or Charente. You will see whether the dullest woman of them all will not be equal to inventing some wile that would hinder the most determined man from bringing the plaintive stranger to the light. Does it not strike you that she looks like an elegy?”

“Do you think so, Montcornet? Then she must be a married woman?”

“Why not a widow?”

“She would be less passive,” said the lawyer, laughing.

“She is perhaps the widow of a man who is gambling,” replied the handsome Colonel.

“To be sure; since the peace there are so many widows of that class!” said Martial. “But my dear Montcornet, we are a couple of simpletons. That face is still too ingenuous, there is too much youth and freshness on the brow and temples for her to be married. What splendid flesh-tints! Nothing has sunk in the modeling of the nose. Lips, chin, everything in her face is as fresh as a white rosebud, though the expression is veiled, as it were, by the clouds of sadness. Who can it be that makes that young creature weep?”

“Women cry for so little,” said the Colonel.

“I do not know,” replied Martial; “but she does not cry because she is left there without a partner; her grief is not of to-day. It is evident that she has beautified herself for this evening with intention. I would wager that she is in love already.”

“Bah! She is perhaps the daughter of some German princeling; no one talks to her,” said Montcornet.

“Dear! how unhappy a poor child may be!” Martial went on. “Can there be anything more graceful and refined than our little stranger? Well, not one of those furies who stand round her, and who believe that they can feel, will say a word to her. If she would but speak, we should see if she has fine teeth.”

“Bless me, you boil over like milk at the least increase of temperature!” cried the Colonel, a little nettled at so soon finding a rival in his friend.

“What!” exclaimed the lawyer, without heeding the Colonel’s question. “Can nobody here tell us the name of this exotic flower?”

“Some lady companion!” said Montcornet.

“What next? A companion! wearing sapphires fit for a queen, and a dress of Malines lace? Tell that to the marines, General. You, too, would not shine in diplomacy if, in the course of your conjectures, you jump in a breath from a German princess to a lady companion.”

Montcornet stopped a man by taking his arm—a fat little man, whose iron-gray hair and clever eyes were to be seen at the lintel of every doorway, and who mingled unceremoniously with the various groups which welcomed him respectfully.

“Gondreville, my friend,” said Montcornet, “who is that quite charming little woman sitting out there under that huge candelabrum?”

“The candelabrum? Ravrio’s work; Isabey made the design.”

“Oh, I recognized your lavishness and taste; but the lady?”

“Ah! I do not know. Some friend of my wife’s, no doubt.”

“Or your mistress, you old rascal.”

“No, on my honor. The Comtesse de Gondreville is the only person capable of inviting people whom no one knows.”

Despite this acrimonious comment, the fat little man’s lips did not lose the smile which the Colonel’s suggestion had brought to them. Montcornet returned to the lawyer, who had rejoined a neighboring group, intent on asking, but in vain, for information as to the fair unknown. He grasped Martial’s arm, and said in his ear:

“My dear Martial, mind what you are about. Madame de Vaudremont has been watching you for some minutes with ominous attentiveness; she is a woman who can guess by the mere movement of your lips what you say to me; our eyes have already told her too much; she has perceived and followed their direction, and I suspect that at this moment she is thinking even more than we are of the little blue lady.”

“That is too old a trick in warfare, my dear Montcornet! However, what do I care? Like the Emperor, when I have made a conquest, I keep it.”

“Martial, your fatuity cries out for a lesson. What! you, a civilian, and so lucky as to be the husband-designate of Madame de Vaudremont, a widow of two-and-twenty, burdened with four thousand napoleons a year—a woman who slips such a diamond as this on your finger,” he added, taking the lawyer’s left hand, which the young man complacently allowed; “and, to crown all, you affect the Lovelace, just as if you were a colonel and obliged to keep up the reputation of the military in home quarters! Fie, fie! Only think of all you may lose.”

“At any rate, I shall not lose my liberty,” replied Martial, with a forced laugh.

He cast a passionate glance at Madame de Vaudremont, who responded only by a smile of some uneasiness, for she had seen the Colonel examining the lawyer’s ring.

“Listen to me, Martial. If you flutter round my young stranger, I shall set to work to win Madame de Vaudremont.”

“You have my full permission, my dear Cuirassier, but you will not gain this much,” the young Maitre des Requetes returned, with a mocking click of his thumb-nail under an upper tooth.

“Remember that I am unmarried,” said the Colonel; “that my sword is my whole fortune; and that such a challenge is setting Tantalus down to a banquet which he will devour.”

“Prrr.”

This defiant roll of consonants was the only reply, as Martial looked the Colonel up and down before turning away.

The fashion of the time required men at a ball to wear white kerseymere breeches and silk stockings. This pretty costume showed to great advantage the perfection of Montcornet’s fine shape. He was five-and-thirty, stalwart, with the soldierly air of the Guards’ Cuirassiers—black moustache, broad forehead, aquiline nose, bright red lips—a manner stamped by command, pleasing to a woman who did not want to make a slave of her husband. Montcornet smiled as he looked at Martial, one of his college friends, whose smaller figure required him to glance down when they talked.

Baron Martial de la Roche-Hugon was a young Provencal patronized by Napoleon; he might be destined for some splendid embassy. He had won the Emperor by his Italian suppleness, a genius for intrigue, a drawing-room eloquence, and a knowledge of manners that substitutes for higher qualities. Young and eager, his face had already acquired the rigid brilliancy of tinned iron, that impassibility of diplomats which conceals emotion—perhaps because it seldom exists. Martial could reckon on the future even amid enjoyment; he had learned to hide ambition beneath the fatuity of a lady-killer, and his apparent mediocrity helped him rise where it offended no great powers.

The two friends now parted with a cordial grasp. The introductory tune for a fresh quadrille cleared the space they had occupied while talking in front of the great drawing-room fireplace of Gondreville’s mansion. Their whispered questions and answers had been nearly inaudible, yet the chandeliers and flambeaux shone so that their faces betrayed more than they intended; the keen-sighted Comtesse de Vaudremont and the artless stranger had noticed enough to be curious—this idle espionage is one of society’s petty pleasures, while many bored people endure it without confession.

To appreciate the interest of this conversation, it is necessary to relate an incident that presently served as an invisible bond among the actors, who were scattered through the rooms.

At about eleven o’clock, just as the dancers returned to their seats, the handsomest woman in Paris, the queen of fashion, entered—the Comtesse de Vaudremont—timing her appearance so that a party was at its height, not yet tired. She never stayed long enough to be seen with tumbled flowers or drooping dress; she preserved her reputation by leaving a ballroom in the same bright order in which she entered. Women whispered that she planned and wore as many dresses in an evening as there were parties to attend.

This night she was not free to leave as she pleased. Pausing on the threshold she shot swift glances, scrutinizing the women to assure herself that she eclipsed them all. She entered with one of the bravest colonels of the Guards’ Artillery, the Emperor’s favorite, the Comte de Soulanges. Their fortuitous association had something mysterious. When their names were announced, people rose; men hurried from side-rooms, curious to see the pair. A wag remarked that “women had quite as much curiosity about seeing a man faithful to his passion as men had in studying a woman difficult to enthrall.”

Comte de Soulanges, about thirty-two, nervous and slender, had a pallid complexion that was not immediately attractive; his black eyes were lively yet he was taciturn in company. Later he would become an orator on the Right in the Restoration assembly. The Comtesse de Vaudremont, tall and rather fat, with dazzling white skin and a small well-carried head, inspired love by her gracious manner; she fulfilled the promise of her beauty.

Though they stood at the center of observation, the pair did not give curiosity long to work. They seemed aware that accident had placed them awkwardly. Martial had hastened to join the men by the fireplace to watch Madame de Vaudremont with jealous anxiety; a secret voice warned him that his success might be precarious. But her coldly polite smile to Soulanges and her small bow relaxed him. Seeing Soulanges still near the sofa, apparently mistaking a glance meant to dismiss them both, the Provencal knit his brows again and smoothed his curls to keep countenance, listening to neighbors though his mind wandered.

Soulanges gazed calmly at the four ranks of women round the room, admiring that dado of diamonds, rubies, gold and shining hair whose lustre almost outshone the waxlights and gilt. Martial’s rival’s indifference put him out of countenance. Incapable of hiding impatience, Martial went to Madame de Vaudremont with a bow. Soulanges gave him a covert glance and impertinently turned away. Silence fell: everyone feared an outbreak between these well-bred men. Suddenly Soulanges’s pale face flushed crimson; he fixed his gaze on the floor so his agitation would not be guessed. Seeing the unknown lady by the candelabrum, he moved away with a melancholy air, passing before Martial and taking refuge in a cardroom. All thought that Soulanges had publicly surrendered, out of fear of ridicule. Martial raised his head proudly and looked at the strange lady; as he sat down near Madame de Vaudremont, he did not hear the words behind her fan:

“Martial, you will oblige me this evening by not wearing that ring that you snatched from me. I have my reasons, and will explain them to you in a moment when we go away. You must give me your arm to go to the Princess de Wagram’s.”

“Why did you come in with the Colonel?” asked the Baron.

“I met him in the hall,” she replied. “But leave me now; everybody is looking at us.”

Martial returned to the Colonel. Thus the little blue lady became the object of the Colonel’s, Soulanges’s, Martial’s and Madame de Vaudremont’s curiosity.

When the friends parted after their challenge, the Baron led Madame de Vaudremont into a brilliant quadrille. Favored by the intoxication of dance, Martial thought to yield to the charm that drew him to the stranger. Though he hid his first glances from the Countess’ watchful eyes, he was soon caught; he could excuse a moment’s absence, but not the persistent silence that met the Countess’s insinuating query:

“Do you like me very much this evening?”

The more dreamy he became, the more she pressed and teased him.

While Martial danced, Montcornet moved from group to group seeking information about the unknown. Having exhausted the good-humor of the indifferent, he resolved to ask the Comtesse de Gondreville when a space near the candelabrum opened between it and the sofas. Several chairs were vacant, forming a fortified palisade of mothers and middle-aged women. The Colonel made his way through this barrier, flattering the dowagers so he might reach the empty space beside the stranger. Braving the glare of the candles, he stood there to Martial’s annoyance.

Too tactful to address the little blue lady suddenly, he began by speaking to a plain woman on the left: “This is a splendid ball, madame! What luxury! What life! On my word, every woman here is pretty! You are not dancing—because you do not care for it, no doubt.”

This vapid talk aimed to draw his right-hand neighbor out; but she, silent and absent, paid no attention. The officer’s planned phrases were intended to lead to: “And you, madame?”—a question from which he hoped much. He was surprised to see tears in the stranger’s eyes; she seemed absorbed in gazing at Madame de Vaudremont.

“You are married, no doubt, madame?” he asked hesitatingly.

“Yes, monsieur,” she replied.

“And your husband is here, of course?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“And why, madame, do you remain in this spot? Is it to attract attention?”

The mournful lady smiled sadly.

“Allow me the honor, madame, of being your partner in the next quadrille, and I will take care not to bring you back here. I see a vacant settee near the fire; come and take it. When so many people are ready to ascend the throne, and Royalty is the mania of the day, I cannot imagine that you will refuse the title of Queen of the Ball which your beauty may claim.”

“I do not intend to dance, monsieur.”

Her curt replies discouraged the Colonel, who withdrew thinking, “She is married.”

Martial, guessing what had happened, smiled and stroked his chin, making his diamond sparkle.

“What are you laughing at?” asked the Comtesse de Vaudremont.

“At the failure of the poor Colonel, who has just put his foot in it—”

“I begged you to take your ring off,” said the Countess, interrupting him.

“I did not hear you.”

“If you can hear nothing this evening, at any rate you see everything, Monsieur le Baron,” said Madame de Vaudremont with vexation.

“That young man is displaying a very fine diamond,” the stranger remarked to the Colonel.

“Splendid,” he replied. “The man is the Baron Martial de la Roche-Hugon, one of my most intimate friends.”

“I have to thank you for telling me his name,” she went on; “he seems an agreeable man.”

“Yes, but he is rather fickle.”

“He seems to be on the best terms with the Comtesse de Vaudremont?” said the lady, looking inquiringly at the Colonel.

“On the very best.”

The unknown turned pale.

“Hallo!” thought the soldier, “she is in love with that lucky devil Martial.”

“I fancied that Madame de Vaudremont had long been devoted to M. de Soulanges,” said the lady, recovering a little from the grief that had clouded her face.

“For a week past the Countess has been faithless,” replied the Colonel. “But you must have seen poor Soulanges when he came in; he is still trying to disbelieve in his disaster.”

“Yes, I saw him,” said the lady. Then she added, “Thank you very much, monsieur,” in a tone of dismissal.

The quadrille ended. Montcornet, withdrawing, told himself by way of consolation, “She is married.”

“Well, valiant Cuirassier,” exclaimed Martial, drawing the Colonel aside into a window-bay to breathe the fresh air from the garden, “how are you getting on?”

“She is a married woman, my dear fellow.”

“What does that matter?”

“Oh, deuce take it! I am a decent sort of man,” replied the Colonel. “I have no idea of paying my addresses to a woman I cannot marry. Besides, Martial, she expressly told me that she did not intend to dance.”

“Colonel, I will bet a hundred napoleons to your gray horse that she will dance with me this evening.”

“Done!” said the Colonel, putting his hand in the coxcomb’s. “Meanwhile I am going to look for Soulanges; he perhaps knows the lady, as she seems interested in him.”

“You have lost, my good fellow,” cried Martial, laughing. “My eyes have met hers, and I know what they mean. My dear friend, you owe me no grudge for dancing with her after she has refused you?”

“No, no. Those who laugh last, laugh longest. But I am an honest gambler and a generous enemy, Martial, and I warn you, she is fond of diamonds.”

With these words the friends parted; Montcornet went to the cardroom, where he saw the Comte de Soulanges at a bouillotte table. Though their comradeship was only that of soldiers in shared danger, Montcornet was struck to see the Artillery colonel, whom he knew prudent, gambling desperately. The heaps of gold and notes on the cards showed the frenzy of play. A circle of silent men stood around; words were few—pass, play, I stop, a thousand Louis, taken—but the five motionless men seemed to speak only with their eyes. Approaching Soulanges, alarmed by his pallor, the Colonel saw him winning: field-marshal the Duc d’Isemberg, Keller, and a famous banker rose from the table cleaned out. Soulanges, gloomier than ever, swept up gold and notes without counting them; his lips curled with bitter scorn, as if defying fortune rather than grateful for its favors.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“Courage,” said the Colonel. “Courage, Soulanges!” Then, to help him, he added, “Come with me. I have some good news for you, but on one condition.”

“What is that?” asked Soulanges.

The Comte de Soulanges rose abruptly, tucking his winnings into his handkerchief; his face was so savage that none of the players objected to his leaving with their money. Every countenance relaxed when his morose face vanished from the circle of light at the gaming-table.

“Those fiends of soldiers are always as thick as thieves at a fair!” said a diplomat who had taken Soulanges’ place. One pallid, fatigued face turned to the newcomer and, with a glance that flashed and died like a diamond, said, “When we say military men, we do not mean civil, Monsieur le Ministre.”

“My dear fellow,” said Montcornet to Soulanges, leading him into a corner, “the Emperor spoke warmly of you this morning, and your promotion to field-marshal is certain.”

“The Master does not love the Artillery.”

“No, but he adores the nobility, and you are an aristocrat. The Master said,” added Montcornet, “that those who married in Paris during the campaign were not to be considered in disgrace. Well?”

The Comte de Soulanges looked as if he understood nothing.

“And now I hope,” the Colonel went on, “that you will tell me if you know a charming little woman sitting under a huge candelabrum—”

At these words the Count’s face lit up; he seized the Colonel’s hand. “My dear General,” said he in a changed voice, “if any man but you had asked me such a question, I would have cracked his skull with this mass of gold. Leave me, I entreat you. I feel more like blowing out my brains—I hate everything I see; I am going. This gaiety, this music, these stupid faces, all laughing, are killing me!”

“My poor friend!” replied Montcornet, giving the Count’s hand a friendly pressure, “you are too vehement. What would you say if I told you that Martial is thinking so little of Madame de Vaudremont that he is smitten with that little lady?”

“If he speaks to her,” cried Soulanges, stammering with rage, “I will thrash him as flat as his own portfolio, even if the coxcomb were in the Emperor’s lap!”

He sank into an easy-chair Montcornet had led him to. The colonel slowly withdrew, seeing Soulanges in a fury beyond consolation.

When Montcornet returned to the ballroom, Madame de Vaudremont was the first person his eyes found; her usually calm face showed ill-concealed agitation. A chair was vacant near hers, and the Colonel sat down.

“I dare wager something vexed you?” he said.

“A mere trifle, General. I want to be gone; I promised to go to the Grand Duchess of Berg’s ball, and must look in first at the Princesse de Wagram’s. Monsieur de la Roche-Hugon, who knows this, amuses himself by flirting with the dowagers.”

“That is not the whole secret of your disturbance, and I will bet a hundred louis that you will remain here the whole evening.”

“Impertinent man!”

“Then I have hit the truth?”

“Well, tell me, what am I thinking of?” said the Countess, tapping the Colonel’s fingers with her fan. “I might even reward you if you guess rightly.”

“I will not accept the challenge; I have too much the advantage of you.”

“You are presumptuous.”

“You are afraid of seeing Martial at the feet—”

“Of whom?” cried the Countess, affecting surprise.

“Of that candelabrum,” replied the Colonel, glancing at the fair stranger.

“You have guessed it,” replied the coquette, hiding her face behind her fan. “Old Madame de Lansac, as malicious as a monkey,” she went on after a pause, “has just told me that Monsieur de la Roche-Hugon is running into danger by flirting with that stranger, who sits here this evening like a skeleton at a feast. I would rather see a death’s head than that face, cruelly beautiful and as pale as a ghost. She is my evil genius. Madame de Lansac,” she added with a flash and gesture of annoyance, “who only goes to balls to watch while pretending to sleep, has made me miserably anxious. Martial shall pay dearly for playing me such a trick. Urge him, meanwhile, since he is your friend, not to make me so unhappy.”

“I have just seen a man who promises to blow his brains out if he speaks to that little lady. And he is a man, madame, to keep his word. But then I know Martial; such threats are to him an encouragement. And, besides—we have wagered,” the Colonel lowered his voice.

“Can it be true?” said the Countess.

“On my word of honor.”

“Thank you, my dear Colonel,” replied Madame de Vaudremont, with an inviting glance.

“Will you dance with me?”

“Yes, but the next quadrille. During this one I want to see what comes of this intrigue and to learn who the blue lady is; she looks intelligent.”

The Colonel, seeing she wished to be alone, retired, satisfied to have begun his attack.

At entertainments like this, women such as Madame de Lansac gather to watch younger mariners. Madame de Lansac could easily read the Countess’s agitation. Though the lady might fan herself gracefully and smile on young men, the Dowager—one of the most clear-sighted, mischief-loving survivors of the eighteenth century—read her heart through the mask. The old woman detected the slightest movements—the faint quiver of the cheeks, the curve of the eyebrows, the least curl of the lips—these were, to the Duchess, like the print of a book. From her large armchair, the coquette of the past, talking to a diplomat who sought anecdotes, admired how bravely the younger woman disguised annoyance and sorrow. Madame de Vaudremont felt as much sorrow as she feigned cheerfulness; she had believed Martial a man whose talents would adorn her life with power, and she now perceived her mistake, dangerous to her pride and reputation. Like many women then, sudden passion increased her vehemence; souls that love much often suffer as much as those consumed by one affection. Her liking for Martial, though new, still wounded deeply: losing a living hope is acute.

The old Duchess, watching for an opportunity to speak to the Countess, dismissed her Ambassador; compared with a lover’s quarrel every other interest paled, even to an old woman. Madame de Lansac shot a sardonic glance which made the Countess fear her fate lay in the dowager’s hands. There are looks between women like torches at a climax; only those who knew that Duchess could appreciate the terror she inspired.

Madame de Lansac was tall; her features suggested “That must have been a handsome woman!” She powdered and rouged to hide wrinkles; her eyes looked dim beside the carmine. She wore many diamonds and dressed with enough taste to avoid ridicule. Her sharp nose promised epigram, her teeth preserved a Voltairean smile; her exquisite politeness softened her mischief, making it impossible to call her malicious.

Her eyes lit up; a triumphant glance and smile—“I promised you as much!”—shot across the room, bringing a blush to the young stranger’s pale cheeks under the chandelier. The alliance between Lansac and the stranger did not escape Madame de Vaudremont, who scented a mystery and determined to penetrate it.

At that instant the Baron de la Roche-Hugon, after unsuccessfully questioning the dowagers about the blue lady, turned to the Comtesse de Gondreville, who replied, “A lady the ‘ancient’ Duchesse de Lansac introduced to me.”

He glanced to the Duchess’ armchair, intercepted the look she sent the stranger; though they had been on bad terms, he decided to speak.

“If the old witch affects friendliness,” thought the Baron, “she’ll play me a trick.—Madame,” he said, “you have, I am told, undertaken the charge of a very precious treasure.”

“Do you take me for a dragon?” said the old lady. “But of whom are you speaking?” she added with a sweetness that revived Martial’s hopes.

“Of that little lady, unknown to all, whom the jealousy of these coquettes has imprisoned in that corner. You, no doubt, know her family?”

“Yes,” said the Duchess. “But what concern have you with a provincial heiress, married some time since, a woman of good birth, whom you none of you know? She goes nowhere.”

“Why does she not dance? She is such a pretty creature! May we conclude a treaty of peace? If you will tell me what I want to know, I promise you that a petition for the restitution of the woods of Navarreins by the Commissioners of Crown Lands shall be strongly urged on the Emperor.”

The Baron’s suggestion was a trick: he proposed to petition for an estate belonging to an elder branch of the Navarreins under false pretense. The Duchess replied soothingly.

“Monsieur,” she said with deceptive gravity, “bring the Comtesse de Vaudremont across to me. I promise you I will reveal to her the mystery of the interesting unknown. You see, every man in the room is as curious as you. All eyes are turned toward the corner where my protegee has so modestly placed herself; she is reaping all the homage the women wished to deprive her of. Happy the man she chooses for her partner!” She fixed her eyes on Madame de Vaudremont with one of those looks saying plainly, “We are talking of you.” Then she added, “I imagine you would rather learn the stranger’s name from your handsome Countess than from mine.”

There was such marked defiance in the Duchess’ attitude that Madame de Vaudremont rose, took the chair Martial placed for her, and, without noticing him, said, “I can guess, madame, that you are talking of me; but I admit my want of perspicacity; I do not know whether it is for good or evil.”

Madame de Lansac pressed the young woman’s pretty hand in her dry, wrinkled fingers and answered in a low, compassionate tone, “Poor child!”

The women looked at each other. Madame de Vaudremont understood Martial was in the way and dismissed him with an imperious, “Leave us.”

The Baron, ill-pleased at seeing the Countess under the spell of the dangerous sibyl who had drawn her to her side, gave one of those looks a man can give—potent over a blinded heart, but ridiculous in the eyes of a woman beginning to criticise him.

“Do you think you can play the Emperor?” said Madame de Vaudremont, turning three-quarters of her face to fix an ironical sidelong gaze on the lawyer.

Martial, a man of the world with wit and acumen, would not risk breaking with a woman favored at Court and whom the Emperor wished to see married. He also counted on provoking her jealousy as the surest means of discovering the secret of her coolness, and withdrew willingly when a new quadrille put everyone in motion.

Making room for dancers, the Baron leaned against a marble console, folded his arms, and watched the two ladies. He followed the glances they directed to the stranger. Comparing the Countess with the new beauty, made alluring by mystery, he fell prey to the detestable self-interest of adventurous lady-killers; he hesitated between a fortune within his grasp and the indulgence of his caprice. The blaze of light gave strong relief to his anxious face against the white silk hangings, so that he might have seemed an evil genius. Even from a distance some observers could say, “There is another poor wretch who seems to be enjoying himself!”

The Colonel, meanwhile, shoulder against the doorway post between ballroom and cardroom, could laugh undetected under his ample moustache; it amused him to watch the dance—pretty heads turning in obedience to the figures; he read in faces, like those of the Countess and Martial, the secrets of their agitation; and then, seeing the gloomy looks of the Comte de Soulanges, still seated on the sofa, and the plaintive expression of the fair unknown, on whose features hopes and involuntary dread alternated, he felt like king of the feast. In this moving picture he saw a presentment of the world, and he laughed as he found himself the object of inviting smiles from many beautiful women. A Colonel of the Imperial Guard, equal to a Brigadier-General, was one of the best matches in the army.

It was nearly midnight. Conversation, gambling, dancing, flirtations, petty rivalries, and scheming had reached that pitch of ardor that makes a young man exclaim, “A fine ball!”

“My sweet little angel,” said Madame de Lansac to the Countess, “you are now at an age when in my day I made many mistakes. Seeing you endure a thousand deaths just now, it occurred to me I might give you some charitable advice. To go wrong at two-and-twenty means spoiling your future; is it not tearing the gown you must wear? My dear, it is not much later that we learn to wear it without crumpling it. Go on making clever enemies and friends without conduct, and you will see what a pleasant life you will some day lead!”

“Oh, madame, it is very hard for a woman to be happy, do not you think?” the Countess eagerly exclaimed.

“My child, at your age you must choose between pleasure and happiness. You want to marry Martial, who is not foolish enough to make a good husband, nor passionate enough to remain a lover. He is in debt, my dear; he is the man to run through your fortune; still, that would be nothing if he could make you happy. Do not you see how aged he looks? He must have been ill; he is making the most of what is left him. In three years he will be a wreck. He will be ambitious; perhaps he may succeed. I do not think so. What is he? A man of intrigue, who may have business skill and gossip agreeably; but he is too presumptuous for any sterling merit; he will not go far. Besides—only look at him. Is it not written on his brow that, at this very moment, what he sees in you is not a young and pretty woman, but the two million francs you possess? He does not love you, my dear; he is reckoning you as if you were an investment. If you are bent on marrying, find an older man with an assured position halfway on his career. A widow’s marriage ought not to be a trivial love affair. Is a mouse to be caught a second time in the same trap? A new alliance ought now to be a good speculation on your part, and in marrying again you ought at least to have a hope of being some day addressed as Madame la Maréchale!”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
As she spoke, both women fixed their eyes on Colonel Montcornet’s handsome face.

“If you prefer to play the delicate flirt and not marry again,” the Duchess went on bluntly, “you better than anyone know how to raise storms and disperse them. But I beg you, never make it your pleasure to disturb families, destroy unions, and ruin wives’ happiness. I have played that perilous game. For a triumph of vanity some poor virtuous soul is murdered—we may make ourselves mortally hated. I learned, a little too late, that, as the Duc d’Albe said, one salmon is worth a thousand frogs. Genuine affection brings far more happiness than transient passions. I came to preach to you; you are the reason for my visit in this house, which stinks of the lower class. Have I just seen actors here? Formerly we received them in our boudoir, but never in the drawing-room! Why do you look at me with such amazement? Listen. If you want to play with men, wring the hearts only of those whose lives are unsettled and who have no duties; the others never forgive errors that cost them happiness. Profit by my experience. That luckless Soulanges, whose head you’ve turned these past fifteen months—do you know what you struck? His whole life. He has been married two years; worshiped by a charming wife he loves but neglects; she lives in tears and embittered silence. Soulanges has had remorse more terrible than his pleasures were sweet. And you, artful little thing, have deserted him. Well, come and see your work.”

The old lady took Madame de Vaudremont’s hand, and they rose.

“There,” said Madame de Lansac, indicating the stranger, pale and trembling under the candles, “that is my grandniece, the Comtesse de Soulanges; today she yielded to my persuasion and consented to leave the sorrowful room where the sight of her child gives little consolation. You see her? You think her charming? Then imagine, dear Beauty, what she must have been when happiness and love shed their glory on that face now blighted.”

The Countess looked away, lost in sad reflection.

The Duchess led her to the card-room door; after looking round as if searching for someone—“And there is Soulanges!” she said.

The Countess shuddered as she saw, in the dimmest corner, Soulanges’s pale, set face in an easy-chair. His indifferent posture and rigid brow betrayed his suffering. Players passed him as if he were dead. The picture of the weeping wife and dejected husband, separated amid festivity like two halves of a lightning-blasted tree, perhaps held prophetic meaning for the Countess. She feared she saw an image of future revenge. Her heart was not yet so dried up; she pressed the Duchess’s hand and thanked her with a childlike smile.

“My dear child,” the old lady whispered, “remember henceforth that we are just as capable of repelling a man’s attentions as of attracting them.”

“She is yours if you are not a simpleton.” These words were whispered into Colonel Montcornet’s ear by Madame de Lansac while the Countess was still absorbed in compassion at the sight of Soulanges, for she still loved him enough to wish to restore him to happiness and promised herself she would exert her charms to make him return to his wife.

“Oh! I will talk to him!” she said to Madame de Lansac.

“Do nothing of the kind, my dear!” cried the old lady as she returned to her armchair. “Choose a good husband and shut your door to my nephew. Believe me, a wife cannot accept her husband’s heart as another woman's gift; she is a hundred times happier believing she reconquered it. By bringing my niece here I have given her an excellent chance of regaining her husband's affection. All I need is for you to play the Colonel.” She pointed to the Baron’s friend, and the Countess smiled.

“Well, madame, do you at last know the name of the unknown?” Martial asked the Countess with pique when he saw her alone.

“Yes,” said Madame de Vaudremont, looking him in the face.

Her features showed as much roguery as fun. Her smile and bright eyes were like a will-o’-the-wisp. Martial, believing she still loved him, assumed the coquetting graces a man uses before the woman he loves. He said with a fatuous air:

“And will you be annoyed with me if I seem to attach great importance to your telling me that name?”

“Will you be annoyed with me,” answered Madame de Vaudremont, “if a remnant of affection prevents my telling you and if I forbid you from making the smallest advances to that young lady? It might cost you your life.”

“To lose your good graces, madame, would be worse than to lose my life.”

“Martial,” said the Countess severely, “she is Madame de Soulanges. Her husband would blow your brains out—if, indeed, you have any—”

“Ha! ha!” laughed the coxcomb. “What! the Colonel can leave in peace the man who robbed him of your love, and then would fight for his wife! What a subversion of principles! I beg of you to allow me to dance with the little lady. You will then be able to judge how little love that heart of ice could feel for you; for, if the Colonel disapproves of my dancing with his wife after allowing me to—”

“But she loves her husband.”

“A still further obstacle that I shall have the pleasure of conquering.”

“But she is married.”

“A whimsical objection!”

“Ah!” said the Countess, with a bitter smile, “you punish us alike for our faults and our repentance!”

“Do not be angry!” exclaimed Martial eagerly. “Oh, forgive me, I beseech you. There, I will think no more of Madame de Soulanges.”

“You deserve that I should send you to her.”

“I am off,” said the Baron, laughing, “and I shall return more devoted to you. You will see the prettiest woman cannot capture the heart that is yours.”

“That is to say, that you want to win Colonel Montcornet’s horse?”

“Ah! Traitor!” said he, threatening his friend with his finger. The Colonel smiled and joined them; the Baron gave him the seat near the Countess, saying to her with a sardonic accent: “Here, madame, is a man who boasted that he could win your good graces in one evening.”

He went away, pleased to have piqued the Countess and done Montcornet an ill turn; but he had not appreciated the irony of Madame de Vaudremont’s speech and did not perceive she had come as far to meet his friend as he had to meet her, though both were unconscious.

At that moment, as the lawyer fluttered to the candelabrum where Madame de Soulanges sat, pale and timid and alive only in her eyes, her husband came to the ballroom door, his eyes flashing with anger. The old Duchess, watchful, flew to her nephew, begged him to give her his arm and find her carriage, affecting mortal boredom to prevent an outbreak. Before going she shot a glance of intelligence at her niece, indicating the enterprising knight about to address her; the signal seemed to say, “There he is, avenge yourself!”

Madame de Vaudremont caught these looks; a sudden light dawned; she feared she was the dupe of the cunning, practiced old woman.

“That perfidious Duchess,” said she to herself, “has perhaps been amusing herself by preaching morality to me while playing me some spiteful trick.”

At this thought Madame de Vaudremont’s pride was roused more than her curiosity to untangle the intrigue. Absorbed, she was no longer mistress of herself. The Colonel, interpreting her embarrassment to his advantage, grew more ardent and pressing. The old, blasé diplomats, amused by the play of faces, had never seen so many intrigues at once. The passions agitating the two couples showed variations at every step in the crowded rooms and reflected in other countenances. The spectacle of so many vivid passions—lovers’ quarrels, pleasing revenges, cruel favors, flaming glances—made the onlookers feel their impotence more keenly.

At last the Baron found a seat by Madame de Soulanges. His eyes stole a long look at her neck, fresh as dew and fragrant as field flowers. He admired up close the beauty that had amazed him from afar. He could see a small, well-shod foot and measure a slender, graceful shape. Then women wore their sash tied close under the bosom in imitation of Greek statues, a pitiless fashion for flawed busts. As he cast furtive glances, Martial was enchanted with her perfection.

“You have not danced once this evening, madame,” said he in soft and flattering tones. “Not, I should suppose, for lack of a partner?”

“I never go to parties; I am quite unknown,” replied Madame de Soulanges coldly, not having understood her aunt’s hint that she should attract the Baron.

Martial twisted the diamond on his left hand to give himself countenance; its rainbow fires seemed to flash a sudden light in the Countess’s mind; she blushed and looked at him with an undefinable expression.

“Do you like dancing?” asked the Provençal to reopen the conversation.

“Yes, very much, monsieur.”

At this reply their eyes met. The young man, surprised by her earnest accent that aroused a vague hope, questioned the lady’s eyes.

“Then, madame, am I not overbold in offering myself to be your partner for the next quadrille?”

Artless confusion colored the Countess’s white cheeks.

“But, monsieur, I have already refused one partner—a military man—”

“Was it that tall cavalry colonel whom you see over there?”

“Precisely so.”

“Oh! he is a friend of mine; feel no alarm. Will you grant me the favor I dare hope for?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

Her tone betrayed emotion so new and deep the lawyer’s world-worn soul was touched. Overcome by schoolboy shyness, he lost confidence; his southern brain caught fire and his phrases seemed graceless beside her bright, subtle replies. Fortunately the quadrille was forming. Standing by his beautiful partner, he felt more at ease. For many men dancing is a phase of being; they think they can influence a woman's heart more by bodily graces than intellect. Martial now wished to display his most effective seductions, judging by the pretentiousness of his movements.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
He led his conquest to the quadrille where the room’s most brilliant women danced. As the orchestra began the first figure, the Baron took pleasure in surveying the ladies forming the square and noting that Madame de Soulanges’ dress might rival Madame de Vaudremont’s, who stood vis-à-vis him and the lady in blue. All eyes turned to Madame de Soulanges; a flattering murmur marked her as the subject of every man’s comment. The young woman, abashed by a triumph she seemed to disclaim, modestly looked down, blushed, and grew more charming. When she raised her eyes she looked at her ravished partner as if to transfer that glory to him, showing she cared more for his praise than for the rest. Though modest and new to the ballroom arts, she knew—like an accomplished coquette—how to lift her eyes to his at the right moment and drop them with assumed bashfulness.

When Trenis’s new figure brought Martial face to face with the Colonel, Montcornet laughed, “I have won your horse.”

“Yes, but you have lost eighty thousand francs a year!” retorted the Colonel, glancing at Madame de Vaudremont.

“What do I care?” replied Martial. “Madame de Soulanges is worth millions!”

At the quadrille’s end whispers circulated. Less pretty women made moral speeches to their partners about the budding liaison between Martial and the Comtesse de Soulanges. The handsomest wondered at her easy surrender. The men could not understand the Baron’s luck, not finding him particularly fascinating. Some indulgent women urged not to judge the Countess too hastily; young wives would be hapless if an expressive look or a few graceful steps could compromise a woman.

Martial alone knew his happiness. During the last figure, forming the moulinet, his fingers clasped the Countess’s, and he fancied her grip through the thin perfumed kid answered his amorous appeal.

“Madame,” he said as the quadrille ended, “do not go back to that odious corner where you have been hiding until now. Is admiration the only benefit you get from the jewels about your white neck and coiffure? Come and take a turn through the rooms to enjoy the scene and yourself.”

Madame de Soulanges yielded to her seducer, whom Martial thought he could secure the more by showing her off. Side by side they walked two or three times among the crowded salons. The Comtesse, evidently uneasy, paused at each door before entering, only going in after stretching her neck to look at the men. This alarm, which crowned the Baron’s satisfaction, did not lift until he said, “Make yourself easy; he is not here.”

They reached an immense picture gallery in a wing of the mansion, where a collation for three hundred awaited. As supper began, Martial led the Countess to an oval boudoir opening onto the garden, where rare flowers and shrubs made a scented bower beneath sky-blue hangings. The festivity’s murmurs died away. Startled at first, the Countess refused firmly to follow; but, seeing in a mirror that they could be seen, she sat on an ottoman with tolerable grace.

“This room is charming,” she said, admiring the hangings looped with pearls.

“All here is love and delight,” said the Baron.

In the mysterious light he read uneasiness, modesty, and eagerness on her agitated face that enchanted him. The young lady smiled; the smile seemed to end her struggle. Gently she took his left hand and drew from his finger the ring on which she had fixed her eyes.

“What a fine diamond!” she exclaimed in the artless tone of a girl yielding to first temptation.

Martial, moved by the involuntary touch as she drew off the ring, looked at her with eyes as glittering as the gem.

“Wear it,” he said, “in memory of this hour, and for the love of—”

She looked at him with such rapture that he did not finish; he kissed her hand.

“You give it me?” she asked, astonished.

“I wish I had the whole world to offer you!”

“You are not joking?” she asked, huskily.

“Will you accept only my diamond?”

“You will never take it back?”

“Never.”

She put the ring on her finger. Martial, assured of coming happiness, was about to put his arm about her waist when she rose and said calmly: “I accept the diamond, monsieur, the less scruple because it belongs to me.”

The Baron was speechless.

“Monsieur de Soulanges took it lately from my dressing-table, and told me he had lost it.”

“You are mistaken, madame,” said Martial, nettled. “It was given me by Madame de Vaudremont.”

“Precisely so,” she said with a smile. “My husband borrowed it from me; he gave it to her; she made it a present to you; my ring has made a little journey, that is all. This ring will perhaps tell me all I do not know, and teach me the secret of always pleasing. Monsieur, if it had not been my own, you may be sure I should not have risked paying so dearly for it; for a young woman, it is said, is in danger with you. But, you see,” and she touched a spring within the ring, “here is M. de Soulanges’ hair.”

She fled into the crowded rooms so swiftly it seemed useless to follow; Martial, utterly confounded, had no mind to press the adventure further. The Countess’ laugh found an echo in the boudoir, where he now perceived, between two shrubs, the Colonel and Madame de Vaudremont, both laughing heartily.

“Will you have my horse, to ride after your prize?” said the Colonel.

Martial met the banter from Madame de Vaudremont and Montcornet with good grace, which secured their silence as to the evening’s events when his friend exchanged his charger for a rich and pretty young wife.

As the Comtesse de Soulanges drove across Paris from the Chaussée d’Antin to the Faubourg Saint-Germain, her soul was prey to alarms. Before leaving the Hotel Gondreville she had passed through the rooms but found neither her aunt nor her husband, who had gone away without her. Terrible suspicions tortured her ingenuous mind. Having witnessed her husband’s torments since Madame de Vaudremont had chained him to her car, she had hoped repentance would restore him. It was with unspeakable repugnance that she had consented to the scheme plotted by her aunt, Madame de Lansac, and now feared she had erred.

The evening saddened her innocent soul. Alarmed at first by the Count’s look of suffering and dejection, she grew more uneasy on seeing her rival’s beauty, and the corruption of society gripped her heart. As she crossed the Pont Royal she threw away the desecrated hair at the back of the diamond that had once been a token of pure affection. She wept, recalling her long grief, and shuddered to think that a woman who wishes for peace must bury such sufferings deep without complaint.

“Alas!” she thought, “what can women do when they do not love? What is the fount of their indulgence? I cannot believe that, as my aunt tells me, reason is all-sufficient to maintain such devotion.”

She was still sighing when her man-servant let down the handsome carriage-step; she flew into the hall of her house, rushed upstairs, and was startled to see her husband sitting by the fire.

“How long is it, my dear, since you have gone to balls without telling me beforehand?” he asked in a broken voice. “You must know that a woman is always out of place without her husband. You compromised yourself strangely by remaining in the dark corner where you had ensconced yourself.”

“Oh, my dear, good Leon,” she said coaxingly, “I could not resist the happiness of seeing you without your seeing me. My aunt took me to this ball, and I was very happy there!”

This softened his assumed severity; he had been blaming himself while dreading her return, fearing she knew of an infidelity he had hoped to hide. As is the way of guilty lovers, he tried, by faultfinding, to escape her anger. Happy to see him smile and find him in a room he had lately shunned, the Countess looked so tenderly that she blushed and cast down her eyes. Her clemency enraptured Soulanges; he seized and kissed her hand gratefully—gratitude being often part of love.

“Hortense, what is that on your finger that has hurt my lip so much?” he asked, laughing.

“It is my diamond which you said you had lost, and which I have found.”

General Montcornet did not marry Madame de Vaudremont, despite their brief understanding; she was among the victims of the terrible fire that gave fame to the ball given by the Austrian ambassador on the occasion of Napoleon’s marriage to the daughter of Emperor Joseph II.

JULY, 1829.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Bonaparte, Napoleon
  The Vendetta
  The Gondreville Mystery
  Colonel Chabert
  The Seamy Side of History
  A Woman of Thirty

Gondreville, Malin, Comte de
  The Gondreville Mystery
  A Start in Life
  The Member for Arcis

Keller, Francois
  Cesar Birotteau
  Eugenie Grandet
  The Government Clerks
  The Member for Arcis

Keller, Madame Francois
  The Member for Arcis
  The Thirteen

La Roche-Hugon, Martial de
  The Peasantry
  A Daughter of Eve
  The Member for Arcis
  The Middle Classes
  Cousin Betty

Montcornet, Marechal, Comte de
  Lost Illusions
  A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  The Peasantry
  A Man of Business
  Cousin Betty

Murat, Joachim, Prince
  The Vendetta
  The Gondreville Mystery
  Colonel Chabert
  The Country Doctor

Soulanges, Comte Leon de
  The Peasantry

Soulanges, Comtesse Hortense de
  The Thirteen
  The Peasantry
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
MIDDLE OF THE STORY — here in the central part, continuing the narrative, repeating the middle section and emphasizing the story's progression.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################