VENDETTA


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley




                             DEDICATION

                  To Puttinati, Milanese Sculptor.





VENDETTA



CHAPTER I. PROLOGUE


In the year 1800, toward the close of October, a foreigner, accompanied
by a woman and a little girl, stood for a long time in front of the
palace of the Tuileries, near the ruins of a recently pulled-down house,
at the point where in our day the wing begins that was intended to unite
the chateau of Catherine de Medici with the Louvre of the Valois.

The man stood with folded arms and a bowed head, which he sometimes
raised to look alternately at the consular palace and at his wife, who
was sitting near him on a stone. Though the woman seemed wholly occupied
with the little girl of nine or ten years, whose long black hair she
toyed with, she lost not a single glance of those her companion cast on
her. Some sentiment other than love united these two beings, inspiring
mutual anxiety in their movements and thoughts. Misery is, perhaps, the
most powerful of all ties.

The stranger had one of those broad, serious heads, covered with thick
hair, such as we see in pictures of the Caracci. The jet black of the
hair was streaked with white. Though noble and proud, his features had a
hardness which spoiled them. In spite of his evident strength and straight,
erect figure, he looked to be over sixty. His dilapidated clothes were
those of a foreign country. Though the faded and once beautiful face of
the wife betrayed the deepest sadness, she forced herself to smile,
assuming a calm countenance whenever her husband looked at her.

The little girl was standing, though weariness showed on the youthful
face, which was tanned by the sun. She had an Italian cast of countenance
and bearing, large black eyes beneath well-arched brows, a native
nobleness, and candid grace. More than one passerby felt strongly moved
by the mere aspect of this group, who made no effort to conceal a despair
as deep as its expression was simple. But the flow of this fugitive
sympathy, characteristic of Parisians, was dried immediately; for as
soon as the stranger felt himself the object of attention, he looked at
his observer with so savage an air that the boldest lounger hurried his
step as though he had trod upon a serpent.

After standing some time undecided, the tall stranger suddenly passed
his hand across his face to wipe away, as it were, the thoughts that were
ploughing furrows in it. He must have taken a desperate resolution.
Casting a glance upon his wife and daughter, he drew a dagger from his
breast and gave it to his companion, saying in Italian:--

“I will see if the Bonapartes remember us.”

Then he walked with a slow, determined step toward the entrance of the
palace, where he was, naturally, stopped by a soldier of the consular
guard, who would not permit a long discussion. Seeing this man’s obstinate
determination, the sentinel presented his bayonet as an ultimatum. Chance
willed that the guard was changed at that moment, and the corporal very
obligingly pointed out to the stranger the spot where the commander of
the post was standing.

“Let Bonaparte know that Bartolomeo di Piombo wishes to speak with him,”
 said the Italian to the captain on duty.

In vain the officer represented to Bartolomeo that he could not see the
First Consul without having previously requested an audience in writing;
the Italian insisted that the soldier should go to Bonaparte. The
officer stated the rules of the post, and refused to comply with this
singular visitor. Bartolomeo frowned heavily, casting a terrible look at
the captain, as if making him responsible for the misfortunes that this
refusal might occasion. Then he kept silence, folded his arms tightly
across his breast, and took up his station under the portico which
serves as an avenue of communication between the garden and the court-
yard of the Tuileries. Persons who will things intensely are apt to be
helped by chance. At the moment when Bartolomeo di Piombo seated himself
on one of the stone posts near the entrance, a carriage drew up, from
which Lucien Bonaparte, minister of the interior, issued.

“Ah, Loucian, it is lucky for me I have met you!” cried the stranger.

These words, said in the Corsican patois, stopped Lucien as he was
springing under the portico. He looked at his compatriot and recognized
him. At the first word Bartolomeo said in his ear, Lucien took the Corsican
away with him.

Murat, Lannes, and Rapp were at that moment in the cabinet of the First
Consul. As Lucien entered, followed by a man so singular in appearance
as Piombo, the conversation ceased. Lucien took Napoleon by the arm and
led him into the recess of a window. After exchanging a few words with
his brother, the First Consul made a sign with his hand, which Murat and
Lannes obeyed by retiring. Rapp pretended not to have seen it, in order
to remain where he was. Bonaparte then spoke to him sharply, and the
aide-de-camp, with evident unwillingness, left the room. The First Consul,
who listened for Rapp’s step in the adjoining salon, opened the door
suddenly, and found his aide-de-camp close to the wall of the cabinet.

“Do you choose not to understand me?” said the First Consul. “I wish to
be alone with my compatriot.”

“A Corsican!” replied the aide-de-camp. “I distrust those fellows too
much to--”

The First Consul could not restrain a smile as he pushed his faithful
officer by the shoulders.

“Well, what has brought you here, my poor Bartolomeo?” said Napoleon.

“To ask asylum and protection from you, if you are a true Corsican,”
 replied Bartolomeo, roughly.

“What ill fortune drove you from the island? You were the richest, the
most--”

“I have killed all the Portas,” replied the Corsican, in a deep voice,
frowning heavily.

The First Consul took two steps backward in surprise.

“Do you mean to betray me?” cried Bartolomeo, with a darkling look at
Bonaparte. “Do you know that there are still four Piombos in Corsica?”

Lucien took an arm of his compatriot and shook it.

“Did you come here to threaten the savior of France?” he said.

Bonaparte made a sign to Lucien, who kept silence. Then he looked at
Piombo and said:--

“Why did you kill the Portas?”

“We had made friends,” replied the man; “the Barbantis reconciled us.
The day after we had drunk together to drown our quarrels, I left home
because I had business at Bastia. The Portas remained in my house, and
set fire to my vineyard at Longone. They killed my son Gregorio. My
daughter Ginevra and my wife, having taken the sacrament that morning,
escaped; the Virgin protected them. When I returned I found no house;
my feet were in its ashes as I searched for it. Suddenly they struck
against the body of Gregorio; I recognized him in the moonlight. ‘The
Portas have dealt me this blow,’ I said; and, forthwith, I went to
the woods, and there I called together all the men whom I had ever
served,--do you hear me, Bonaparte?--and we marched to the vineyard of
the Portas. We got there at five in the morning; at seven they were all
before God. Giacomo declares that Eliza Vanni saved a child, Luigi. But
I myself bound him to his bed before setting fire to the house. I have
left the island with my wife and child without being able to discover
whether, indeed, Luigi Porta is alive.”

Bonaparte looked with curiosity at Bartolomeo, but without surprise.

“How many were there?” asked Lucien.

“Seven,” replied Piombo. “All of them were your persecutors in the olden
times.”

These words roused no expression of hatred on the part of the two
brothers.

“Ha! you are no longer Corsicans!” cried Piombo, with a sort of despair.
“Farewell. In other days I protected you,” he added reproachfully.
“Without me, your mother would never have reached Marseille,” he said,
addressing Bonaparte, who was silent and thoughtful, his elbow resting
on a mantel-shelf.

“As a matter of duty, Piombo,” said Napoleon at last, “I cannot take you
under my wing. I have become the leader of a great nation; I command the
Republic; I am bound to execute the laws.”

“Ha! ha!” said Bartolomeo, scornfully.

“But I can shut my eyes,” continued Bonaparte. “The tradition of the
Vendetta will long prevent the reign of law in Corsica,” he added, as if
speaking to himself. “But it must be destroyed, at any cost.”

Bonaparte was silent for a few moments, and Lucien made a sign to Piombo
not to speak. The Corsican swayed his head from right to left in deep
disapproval.

“Live here, in Paris,” resumed the First Consul, addressing Bartolomeo;
“we will know nothing of this affair. I will cause your property in
Corsica to be bought, to give you enough to live on for the present.
Later, before long, we will think of you. But, remember, no more
vendetta! There are no woods here to fly to. If you play with daggers,
you must expect no mercy. Here, the law protects all citizens; and no
one is allowed to do justice for himself.”

“He has made himself the head of a singular nation,” said Bartolomeo,
taking Lucien’s hand and pressing it. “But you have both recognized me
in misfortune, and I am yours, henceforth, for life or death. You may
dispose as you will of the Piombos.”

With these words his Corsican brow unbent, and he looked about him in
satisfaction.

“You are not badly off here,” he said, smiling, as if he meant to lodge
there himself. “You are all in red, like a cardinal.”

“Your success depends upon yourself; you can have a palace, also,”
 said Bonaparte, watching his compatriot with a keen eye. “It will often
happen that I shall need some faithful friend in whom I can confide.”

A sigh of joy heaved the vast chest of the Corsican, who held out his
hand to the First Consul, saying:--

“The Corsican is in you still.”

Bonaparte smiled. He looked in silence at the man who brought, as it
were, a waft of air from his own land,--from that isle where he had been
so miraculously saved from the hatred of the “English party”; the land
he was never to see again. He made a sign to his brother, who then took
Piombo away. Lucien inquired with interest as to the financial condition
of the former protector of their family. Piombo took him to a window and
showed him his wife and Ginevra, seated on a heap of stones.

“We came from Fontainebleau on foot; we have not a single penny,” he
said.

Lucien gave his purse to his compatriot, telling him to come the next
day, that arrangements might be made to secure the family’s comfort. The
value of Piombo’s property in Corsica, if sold, would scarcely maintain
him honorably in Paris.

Fifteen years elapsed between Piombo’s arrival with his family in Paris
and the following event, which would be scarcely intelligible to the
reader without this narrative of the foregoing circumstances.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER II. THE STUDIO


Servin, one of our distinguished artists, was the first to conceive
opening a studio for young girls who wished to take painting lessons.

About forty, of the purest morals and wholly given to his art, he had
married for inclination the dowerless daughter of a general. At first
the mothers of his pupils brought their daughters themselves; then they
were content to send them alone, after learning the master’s principles
and seeing the pains he took to deserve their confidence.

He intended to take only young ladies of rich, well-placed families, to
avoid complaints about class composition. He even refused girls who
wished to become professional artists, for they required instruction
without which no talent could advance. Gradually his prudence and the
skill with which he initiated pupils, the certainty each mother felt
that her daughter was among well-bred young girls, and his marriage,
gave him an excellent reputation as a teacher in society. When a young
girl wished to learn to draw, friends invariably advised: “Send her to
Servin’s.”

Servin became, therefore, for feminine art, a specialty; like Herbault
for bonnets, Leroy for gowns, and Chevet for eatables. It was recognized
that a young woman trained by Servin could judge the Musee, make a
striking portrait, copy an old master, or paint a genre picture. He
thus sufficed for the educational needs of the aristocracy. Yet in spite
of relations with the best families in Paris he was independent and
patriotic, keeping among them that easy, brilliant, half-ironical tone,
and that freedom of judgment which characterizes painters.

He had carried scrupulous precaution into the arrangements of the
locality where his pupils studied. The entrance to the attic above his
apartments was walled up. To reach this retreat, as sacred as a harem,
one had to go up a small spiral stair within his rooms. The studio,
occupying nearly the whole attic under the roof, presented those vast
proportions that surprise visitors when, after climbing sixty feet,
they expect to find an artist squeezed into a gutter.

This gallery was profusely lighted from above through enormous panes
of glass with green linen shades, by which artists arrange the light.
Caricatures, heads drawn at a stroke in color or with the point of a
knife, on walls painted dark gray, proved that, barring expression,
distinguished young girls have as much fun and folly as men. A small
stove with a large pipe, which described a fearful zigzag before it
reached the roof, was the room’s necessary ornament. A shelf ran round
the walls with plaster models, heterogeneously placed, most covered with
gray dust. Here and there, above this shelf, a Niobe head hung to a nail
with pose of woe; a Venus smiled; a hand thrust forward like that of a
pauper asking alms; a few “ecorches,” yellowed by smoke, looked like
limbs snatched from a graveyard; besides these, pictures, drawings,
lay figures, frames without paintings, and paintings without frames gave
the room that studio physiognomy of jumble and bareness, poverty and
riches, care and neglect. The vast receptacle of an atelier, where all
seems small, even man, has something of an Opera coulisse; here lie
ancient garments, gilded armor, fragments of stuff, machinery. Yet
there is something mysteriously grand, like thought; genius and death
are there; Diana and Apollo beside a skull, beauty and destruction,
pseody and reality, colors glowing in shadows, often a whole drama,
motionless and silent. Strange symbol of an artist’s head!

At the moment when this history begins, a brilliant July sun lit the
studio, two rays striking lengthwise traced diaphanous gold lines
where dust shimmered. A dozen easels raised sharp points like masts in
a port. Several young girls animated the scene by varied expressions,
attitudes, and dresses. Strong shadows cast by the green serge curtains,
arranged for each easel, produced contrasts and piquant light-and-shade
effects. This group was the prettiest of all the pictures in the studio.

A fair young girl, simply dressed, sat at some distance from her
companions, working bravely and seeming in dread of mishap. No one
looked at or spoke to her; she was the prettiest, most modest, and, it
seemed, the least rich among them. Two principal groups, distinctly
separated, showed two sets or cliques, two minds even here, where rank
and fortune might seem forgotten.

But whatever that might be, these young girls, sitting or standing,
amid color-boxes, playing with brushes or preparing them, handling
dazzling palettes, painting, laughing, talking, singing, absolutely
natural and exhibiting their real selves, composed a spectacle unknown
to man. One, proud, haughty, capricious, with black hair and fine hands,
cast her glance here and there; another, light-hearted, with chestnut
hair and delicate white hands, smiled and seemed thoughtless; a third
was dreamy, melancholy, pale, bending her head like a drooping flower;
her neighbor, tall and indolent with long Asiatic eyes, said little and
reflected, glancing at Antinous’s head.

Among them, like the jocoso of a Spanish play, full of wit and
epigram, another girl watched the rest with a comprehensive glance,
making them laugh and tossing up her head, arch and pretty. She seemed
to rule the first group — daughters of bankers, notaries, and merchants
— all rich, but aware of the cutting slights the aristocratic group put
upon them. The latter were led by the daughter of one of the King’s
ushers, a little creature as silly as she was vain, proud of being the
daughter of a man with “an office at court.” She pretended to understand
the master at the first word, seemed to do her work as a favor, used an
eyeglass, came very dressed and always late, and entreated companions to
speak low.

In this second group were several girls with exquisite figures and
distinguished features, but little simplicity or candor. Their attitudes
were elegant and movements graceful, but their faces lacked frankness;
they belonged to a world where polite manners form the character early,
and the abuse of social pleasures destroys sentiment and develops
egotism.

Yet when the whole class assembled, childlike heads were seen among
this bevy, ravishingly pure and virgin, faces with half-open lips,
spotless teeth, and a virgin smile flickering. The studio then resembled
not a studio, but a group of angels on a cloud.

By mid-day on this occasion, Servin had not appeared. For days he had
spent most of his time in another studio, giving the last touches to a
picture for the Exposition. All at once Mademoiselle Amelie Thirion,
leader of the aristocrats, began to speak low and earnestly to her
neighbor. A great silence fell on the patrician group, and the
commercial party, surprised, were equally silent, trying to discover
the subject. The secret of the young ultras was soon revealed.

Amelie rose, took an easel near hers, carried it away from the noble
group, and placed it close to a board partition which separated the
studio from the attic’s extreme end, where broken casts, defaced
canvases, and the winter wood supply were kept. Amelie’s action caused
a murmur, yet she rolled hastily to the side the stool, the box of
colors, and even the Prudhon picture her absent pupil was copying. After
this coup d’état the Right began to work in silence, but the Left
discoursed at length.

“What will Mademoiselle Piombo say to that?” asked a girl of Mademoiselle
Matilde Roguin, the lively oracle of the banking group.

“She’s not a girl to say anything,” replied Matilde; “but fifty years
hence she’ll remember the insult as if done the night before, and
revenge it cruelly. She is a person I don’t want to be at war with.”

“The slight these young ladies mean to put upon her is all the more
unkind,” said another, “because yesterday Mademoiselle Ginevra was very
sad. Her father, they say, has just resigned. They ought not to add to
her trouble, for she was considerate during the Hundred Days. Never did
she say a word to wound them. I think our ultras act more from jealousy
than party spite.”

“I have a great mind to get Mademoiselle Piombo’s easel and place it
next to mine,” said Matilde. She rose, but second thoughts made her sit
down.

“With a character like hers,” she said, “one can’t tell how she would
take civility; better wait events.”

“Ecco la,” said the girl with black eyes, languidly.

The steps of a person coming up the narrow stairway sounded. “Here she
comes!” passed from mouth to mouth, and then absolute silence reigned.

To understand the importance of Amelie Thirion’s ostracism, add that
this scene took place toward the end of July, 1815. The second return of
the Bourbons had shaken friendships that had held under the first
Restoration. Families, almost all divided in opinion, renewed many
deplorable scenes that stain history in times of civil war. Children,
young girls, old men shared the monarchial fever. Discord glided beneath
roofs; distrust dyed words and actions of the most intimate friends.

Ginevra Piombo loved Napoleon to idolatry; how then could she hate him?
The emperor was her compatriot and the benefactor of her father.
Baron di Piombo was among those devoted servants who helped most in the
return from Elba. Incapable of denying his political faith and anxious
to confess it, the old baron remained in Paris among enemies. Ginevra
Piombo was the more open to condemnation because she made no secret of
the grief the second Restoration caused her family. The only tears she
had so far shed in life were drawn from her by news of Napoleon’s
captivity on the Bellerophon and Labedoyere’s arrest.

The studio’s aristocratic girls belonged to the most devoted royalist
families in Paris. It is hard to convey the exaggerations and horror of
the Bonapartists then prevalent. However petty Amelie’s action may seem
now, it was a natural expression of prevailing hatred. Ginevra, one of
Servin’s first pupils, had occupied the place now taken from her since
her first day. The aristocratic circle had gradually surrounded her.
To drive her from a spot that in some sense belonged to her was not only
to insult her, but to inflict an artistic pain; all artists have a
predilect spot where they work.

Nevertheless, political prejudice was not the chief influence on the
Right clique. Ginevra, much the ablest of Servin’s pupils, was an object
of intense jealousy. The master testified admiration for her talents and
character; she concluded most comparisons. In fact, without anyone able
to explain the ascendancy she obtained over those around her, she
exercised a prestige not unlike that of Bonaparte over his soldiers.

The aristocracy of the studio had for days resolved upon the fall of
this queen, but none had yet openly avoided the Bonapartist. Mademoiselle
Thirion’s act was a decisive stroke intended to force others to become
open accomplices of her hatred. Though Ginevra was sincerely loved by
several of those royalists, most were indoctrinated at home with party
ideas, and decided by feminine tactics it was best to keep aloof.

On Ginevra’s arrival she was received in profound silence. Of all the
young women who had come to Servin’s studio, she was the handsomest,
tallest, and best made. Her carriage and demeanor had a character of
nobility and grace commanding respect. Her face, instinct with
intelligence, seemed to radiate light, so inspired was it with the
enthusiasm peculiar to Corsicans—without precluding calmness. Her long
hair and black eyes and lashes expressed passion; the corners of her
mouth, softly defined, and the lips, a trifle too marked, gave signs of
that kindliness strong beings derive from conscious strength.

By a singular caprice, the charm of her face was somewhat contradicted
by a marble forehead, on which lay an almost savage pride, from which
seemed to emanate Corsican moral instincts. All the rest of her person,
her simplicity, the easy grace of her Lombard beauty, was so seductive
that it was difficult to give her pain. She inspired such attraction
that her old father had her accompanied to and from the studio. The
only defect of this poetic creature came from the very power of a fully
developed beauty; she looked a woman. She had refused marriage out of
love for her parents, feeling herself necessary to their comfort. Her
taste for painting took the place of passions and interests that usually
absorb her sex.

“You are very silent to-day, mesdemoiselles,” she said, after advancing
a little among her companions. “Good-morning, my little Laure,” she
added in a soft, caressing voice, approaching the young girl painting
apart. “That head is strong,—the flesh tints a little too rosy, but
the drawing is excellent.”

Laure raised her head and looked tenderly at Ginevra; their faces showed
mutual affection. A faint smile brightened the Italian’s lips, who
seemed thoughtful, and she walked slowly to her easel, glancing at the
drawings and pictures on her way, and greeting the young girls of the
first group, not observing the unusual curiosity excited by her
presence. She was like a queen in her court; she paid no attention to
the profound silence of the patricians and passed before them without a
word. Her absorption seemed so great that she sat before her easel,
opened her color-box, took up her brushes, drew on her brown sleeves,
arranged her apron, looked at her picture, examined her palette,
apparently not thinking of what she was doing. All heads in the banking
group turned toward her. If the Thirion camp did not show impatience
frankly, their sidelong glances were none the less directed at Ginevra.

“She hasn’t noticed it!” said Mademoiselle Roguin.

At this instant Ginevra abandoned the meditative attitude and turned
toward the aristocrats. She measured the distance that separated her
from them at a glance, but said nothing.

“It hasn’t occurred to her they meant to insult her,” said Matilde;
“she neither colored nor turned pale. How vexed these girls will be if
she likes her new place as well as the old! You are out of bounds,
mademoiselle,” she added aloud, addressing Ginevra.

The Italian pretended not to hear; perhaps she really did not. She rose
abruptly, walked with a certain deliberation along the side of the
partition that separated the adjoining closet from the studio, and
seemed to examine the sash through which her light came—giving so much
importance to it that she mounted a chair to raise the green serge
higher. Reaching that height, her eye leveled with a slight opening in
the partition, the real object of her efforts, for the glance she cast
through it compared only to a miser discovering Aladdin’s treasure. Then
she sprang down hastily and returned to her place, changed the position
of her picture, pretended dissatisfaction with the light, pushed a
table close to the partition, placed a chair on it, climbed lightly to
the summit of this erection, and again looked through the crevice. She
cast but one glance into the space beyond, lit through a skylight; what
she saw produced so strong an effect that she tottered.

“Take care, Mademoiselle Ginevra, you’ll fall!” cried Laure.

All the girls gazed at the imprudent climber; fear of their coming to
her gave her courage; she recovered her equilibrium and replied, while
balancing on the shaking chair: “Pooh! it is more solid than a throne!”

She then secured the curtain, came down, pushed the chair and table as
far as possible from the partition, returned to her easel, and seemed
to arrange it to suit the light. Her picture, however, was not in her
mind, which was wholly bent on getting near the closet door where she
finally settled. Sitting there she could distinctly hear a sound that
had excited her curiosity the evening before and had whirled her young
imagination across vast fields of conjecture. She recognized the firm
and regular breathing of a man she had just seen asleep. Her curiosity
was satisfied beyond expectation, but she felt saddled by an immense
responsibility. Through the opening in the wall she had seen the
Imperial eagle; upon the flock bed, faintly lighted from above, lay the
form of an officer of the Guard. She guessed all. Servin was hiding a
proscribed man!

She now trembled lest any companion come near and, by the regular
breath or some deeper one, reveal the political victim. She resolved to
keep her place by that door, trusting her wits to baffle danger.

“Better that I should be here,” she thought, “to prevent some luckless
accident, than leave that poor man at the mercy of a heedless betrayal.”

This was the secret of the indifference Ginevra had seemed to show to
the move of her easel. She was inwardly delighted, because the change
enabled her to gratify her curiosity naturally; besides, she was too
preoccupied to perceive the reason for her removal.

Nothing is more mortifying to young girls, or any of us, than to see a
piece of mischief, an insult, or biting speech miss its effect through
the contempt or indifference of the intended victim. Hatred to an enemy
seems to grow as that enemy is raised above us. Ginevra’s behavior was
an enigma to all; friends and enemies were equally surprised; her
friends claimed all virtues for her except forgiveness of injuries.
Though occasions for that vice rarely arose in a studio, the specimens
she had sometimes shown of vindictiveness left a strong impression.

After many conjectures, Mademoiselle Roguin concluded the Italian’s
silence showed a grandeur of soul; the banking circle, inspired, formed
a project to humiliate the aristocracy. They succeeded by a fire of
sarcasms which presently humbled the Right coterie.

Madame Servin’s arrival put a stop to the struggle. With malice’s
shrewdness, Amelie Thirion had noticed, analyzed, and mentally
commented on the extreme preoccupation of Ginevra, which prevented her
from hearing the bitterly polite war of words. The vengeance
Mademoiselle Roguin and her companions inflicted on Thirion’s group had
the effect of driving the young ultras to search for the cause of the
silence obstinately maintained by Ginevra. The beautiful Italian became
the centre of all glances and was henceforth watched by friends and
foes alike.

It is very difficult to hide even a slight emotion from fifteen
inquisitive, unoccupied young girls, whose wits and mischief ask for
secrets to guess and schemes to create; they find many interpretations
for each gesture, glance, and word.

At this moment Madame Servin produced an interlude in the drama played
below the surface, the sentiments and progress of which were expressed
by phrases almost allegorical, by glances, by gestures, by silence more
intelligible than words. As soon as Madame Servin entered, her eyes
turned to the door near which Ginevra sat. Under present circumstances
this glance was not lost; at first none took notice, but Mademoiselle
Thirion recollected it later, and it explained to her the doubt, fear,
and mystery that gave something wild and frightened to Madame Servin’s
eyes.

“Mesdemoiselles,” she said, “Monsieur Servin cannot come to-day.”

She then went round complimenting each girl, receiving in return those
feminine caresses given as much by tone and looks as by gestures. She
reached Ginevra with uneasiness she tried in vain to disguise. They
nodded in a friendly way but said nothing; one painted, the other stood
looking at the painting. The soldier’s breathing could be distinctly
heard, but Madame Servin appeared not to notice it; her feigned
ignorance was so obvious that Ginevra recognized wilful deafness. The
unknown man turned on his pallet.

The Italian then looked fixedly at Madame Servin, who said without
change of face: “Your copy is as fine as the original; if I had to
choose between the two I should be puzzled.”

“Monsieur Servin has not taken his wife into his confidence as to this
mystery,” thought Ginevra, who, after replying with a gentle smile of
incredulity, began to hum a Corsican canzonetta to cover the noise made
by the prisoner.

It was so unusual to hear the studious Italian sing that all the other
girls looked up in surprise. Later this circumstance served as proof to
charitable suppositions of jealousy.

Madame Servin soon went away, and the session ended without further
events; Ginevra allowed her companions to depart and seemed to intend to
work later. But unconsciously she betrayed desire to be left alone by
impatient, ill-disguised glances at pupils slow in leaving. Mademoiselle
Thirion, cruel to the girl who excelled her, guessed her rival’s
industry hid some purpose. By dint of watching she was struck by the
attentive air with which Ginevra seemed to be listening to sounds no
one else had heard. The expression of impatience she detected was like
a flash of light to her.

Amelie was the last to leave; from there she went down to Madame
Servin’s apartment and spoke for a moment; then she pretended to have
left her bag, ran softly back to the studio, and found Ginevra once more
mounted on her frail scaffolding, absorbed in contemplation and not
hearing the slight noise of her companion’s footsteps. True, Amelie
stepped as if on eggs. She hastily withdrew outside the door and coughed.
Ginevra quivered, turned, saw her enemy, blushed, hastened to alter the
shade to give meaning to her position, and came down leisurely. She
left the studio, bearing in memory the image of a man’s head as beauteous
as Girodet’s Endymion, a masterpiece she had lately copied.

“To banish so young a man! Who can he be? for he is not Marshal Ney—”

These two sentences are the simplest expression of many ideas Ginevra
turned over for two days. On the third day, despite haste to be first
at the studio, she found Mademoiselle Thirion already there, having come
in a carriage.

Ginevra and her enemy observed each other for a long time, making
their faces impenetrable. Amelie had seen the handsome head of the
mysterious man, but fortunately and unfortunately the Imperial eagles
and uniform were so placed she did not see them through the crevice.
She was lost in conjectures. Suddenly Servin came in, much earlier
than usual.

“Mademoiselle Ginevra,” he said after glancing round, “why have you
placed yourself there? The light is bad. Come nearer to the rest and
pull down that curtain a little.”

Then he sat down near Laure, whose work earned his cordial attention.

“Well, well!” he cried; “here is a head extremely well done. You’ll be
another Ginevra.”

The master went from easel to easel, scolding, flattering, jesting, his
jests more dreaded than his reprimands. Ginevra had not obeyed his order
but remained at her post, resolved not to quit it. She took a sheet of
paper and sketched in sepia the head of the hidden man. A work done
under emotion has its own stamp. Passion often takes the place of
genius; under her circumstances the intuition lent her, for the moment,
a supernatural talent. The head was dashed on the paper amid an awkward
tremble she mistook for fear, in which a physiologist would recognize
inspiration’s fire. From time to time she glanced furtively at
companions to hide the sketch if any came near. But despite her
watchfulness, there was a moment when she did not see Amelie’s eyeglass
turned full upon the drawing from a great portfolio. Mademoiselle
Thirion, recognizing the portrait of the mysterious man, showed
herself abruptly, and Ginevra hastily covered the sheet.

“Why do you stay there in spite of my advice, mademoiselle?” asked the
professor gravely.

The pupil turned her easel so only the master could see the sketch,
which she placed upon it, and said in an agitated voice: “Do you not
think, as I do, that the light is very good? Had I not better remain
here?”

Servin turned pale. As nothing escapes malice’s piercing eyes,
Mademoiselle Thirion became as it were a sharer in the sudden emotion
of master and pupil.

“You are right,” said Servin; “but really,” he added with a forced
laugh, “you will soon know more than I do.”

A pause followed while the professor studied the officer’s head drawing.

“It is a masterpiece! worthy of Salvator Rosa!” he exclaimed with the
energy of an artist.

All the pupils rose, and Mademoiselle Thirion darted forward with the
velocity of a tiger. At that instant the prisoner, awakened perhaps by
the noise, began to move. Ginevra knocked over her stool, said a few
incoherent sentences, and began to laugh; she had thrown the portrait
into her portfolio before Amelie could reach her. The easel was now
surrounded; Servin descanted on the beauty of the copy his favorite was
making, and the whole class was duped by this stratagem, except Amelie,
who slipping behind companions attempted to open the portfolio where
she had seen Ginevra throw the sketch. The latter took it up without a
word and placed it before her. The two girls then looked at each other
fixedly, in silence.

“Come, mesdemoiselles, take your places,” said Servin. “If you wish to
do as well as Mademoiselle di Piombo, you mustn’t be always talking
fashions and balls, trifling your time away.”

When they were reseated, Servin sat down beside Ginevra.

“Was it not better that I should be the one to discover the mystery
rather than the others?” asked the girl in a low voice.

“Yes,” replied the painter, “you are one of us, a patriot; but even if
you were not, I should have confided the matter to you.”

Master and pupil understood one another, and Ginevra no longer feared
to ask: “Who is he?”

“An intimate friend of Labedoyere, who contributed more than any other
man, except the unfortunate colonel, to unite the 7th regiment with the
grenadiers of Elba. He was a major in the Imperial Guard and was at
Waterloo.”

“Why not have burned his uniform and shako and given him citizen’s
clothes?” asked Ginevra impatiently.

“He will have them to-night.”

“You ought to have closed the studio for some days.”

“He is going away.”

“Then they’ll kill him,” said the girl. “Let him stay here with you till
the storm is over. Paris is still where a man can be hidden safely. Is
he a friend of yours?” she asked.

“No; he has no claim on me but ill-luck. He came into my hands by my
father-in-law, who returned to the army during the campaign and very
cleverly rescued him from those who captured Labedoyere. He came here
to defend the general, a foolish fellow!”

“Do you call him that!” cried Ginevra, casting astonished glance at the
painter who was silent a moment.

“My father-in-law is too closely watched to keep him in his own house,”
Servin resumed. “So he brought him to me by night about a week ago. I
hoped to keep him out of sight in this corner, the only spot in the
house where he could be safe.”

“If I can be useful, employ me,” said Ginevra. “I know the Marechal de
Feltre.”

“Well, we’ll see,” replied the painter.

This conversation lasted too long to escape the other girls. Servin
left Ginevra, went round once more to each easel, and gave such long
lessons that he was still there at the hour pupils usually left.

“You are forgetting your bag, Mademoiselle Thirion,” said the professor,
running after the girl now condescending to spy to satisfy jealousy.

The baffled pupil returned for the bag, feigning surprise at her
carelessness; but Servin’s act was fresh proof to her of a mystery’s
existence and importance. She now noisily ran down the staircase and
slammed the door into the Servins’ apartment to give an impression she
had gone; then she softly returned and stationed herself outside the
studio door.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER III. LABEDOYERE’S FRIEND


When the painter and Ginevra believed themselves alone, Servin rapped peculiarly on the door of the dark garret, which immediately turned on its rusty, creaking hinges. Ginevra then saw a tall, well-made young man whose Imperial uniform set her heart beating. The officer had one arm in a sling, and the pallor of his face revealed sharp suffering. Seeing an unknown woman, he recoiled.

Amelie, unable to look into the room with the door closed, was afraid to stay longer; satisfied with having heard the garret open, she departed noiselessly.

“Fear nothing,” said the painter to the officer. “Mademoiselle is the daughter of a most faithful friend of the Emperor, the Baron di Piombo.”

The young soldier retained no doubts as to Ginevra’s patriotism as soon as he saw her.

“You are wounded,” she said.

“Oh! it is nothing, mademoiselle,” he replied; “the wound is healing.”

Just then the loud cries of the vendors rose from the street: “Condemned to death!” They all trembled, and the soldier was first to hear a name that turned him pale.

“Labedoyere!” he cried, falling on a stool.

They looked at one another in silence. Drops gathered on the livid forehead of the young man; he seized the black tufts of his hair with a gesture of despair and rested his elbow on Ginevra’s easel.

“After all,” he said, rising abruptly, “Labedoyere and I knew what we were doing. We were certain of the fate awaiting us, whether from triumph or defeat. He dies for the Cause, and here am I hiding myself!”

He rushed toward the studio door; but Ginevra reached it first and barred his way.

“Can you restore the Emperor?” she said. “Do you expect to raise that giant who could not maintain himself?”

“But what can I do?” said the young man, addressing the two friends chance had sent to him. “I have not a relation in the world. Labedoyere was my protector and friend; without him I am alone. Tomorrow I myself may be condemned; my only fortune was my pay. I spent my last penny to come here and try to snatch Labedoyere from his fate; death is, therefore, a necessity for me. When a man decides to die he ought to know how to sell his life to the executioner. I was thinking just now that the life of an honest man is worth that of two traitors, and the blow of a dagger well placed may give immortality.”

This spasm of despair alarmed the painter and even Ginevra, whose nature comprehended the young man. She admired his handsome face and delightful voice, the sweetness of which was scarcely lessened by tones of fury. Then she poured balm upon his wounds:--

“Monsieur,” she said, “as for your pecuniary distress, permit me to offer my savings. My father is rich; I am his only child; he loves me, and I am sure he will never blame me. Have no scruple in accepting my offer; our property comes from the Emperor; we do not own a penny not the result of his munificence. Is it not gratitude to assist his faithful soldiers? Take the sums you need as indifferently as I offer them. It is only money!” she added, in contempt. “Now, as for friends--those you shall have.”

She raised her head proudly, and her eyes shone brilliantly.

“The head which falls tomorrow before a dozen muskets will save yours,” she went on. “Wait till the storm is over; you can then escape and take service in foreign countries if you are not forgotten here; or in the French army, if you are.”

There is always a delicacy in the comfort women give, something maternal, foreseeing, and complete. When words of hope and peace are said with graceful gesture and that heart-born eloquence, and when, above all, the benefactress is beautiful, a young man does not resist. The prisoner breathed in love through all his senses. A rosy tinge colored his white cheeks; his eyes lost some of the sadness that dulled them, and he said, in a peculiar tone:--

“You are an angel of goodness--But Labedoyere!” he added. “Oh, Labedoyere!”

At this cry they looked at one another in silence, each comprehending the others’ thoughts. No longer friends of twenty minutes only, they were friends of twenty years.

“Dear friend,” said Servin, “can you save him?”

“I can avenge him.”

Ginevra quivered. Though the stranger was handsome, his appearance had not influenced her; the soft pity in a woman’s heart for miseries that are not ignoble had stifled in Ginevra all other emotions; but to hear a cry of vengeance, to find in that proscribed being an Italian soul, devotion to Napoleon, Corsican generosity!--ah! that was too much. She looked at the officer with a respectful emotion which shook his heart. For the first time in her life a man had caused her a keen emotion. She now, like other women, put the soul of the stranger on a par with the noble beauty of his features and the happy proportions of his figure, which she admired as an artist. Led by accidental curiosity to pity, from pity to powerful interest, she came, through that interest, to such profound sensations that she felt in danger if she stayed.

“Until tomorrow, then,” she said, giving the officer a gentle smile by way of parting consolation.

Seeing that smile, which threw a new light on Ginevra’s features, the stranger forgot all else for an instant.

“Tomorrow,” he said, sadly; “but tomorrow, Labedoyere--”

Ginevra turned, put a finger on her lips, and looked at him, as if to say: “Be calm, be prudent.”

And the young man cried out in his own language:

“Ah! Dio! che non vorrei vivere dopo averla veduta?--who would not wish to live after seeing her?”

The peculiar accent made Ginevra quiver.

“Are you Corsican?” she cried, returning toward him with a beating heart.

“I was born in Corsica,” he replied; “but I was brought, while very young, to Genoa, and as soon as old enough for military service I enlisted.”

The beauty of the young man, the charm lent by his attachment to the Emperor, his wound, misfortunes, and danger—all blended in a new and delightful sentiment. This persecuted man was a child of Corsica; he spoke its cherished language! She stood motionless, held by a magical sensation; before her eyes was a living picture, to which all human feelings, united by chance, gave vivid colors. By Servin’s invitation the officer sat on a divan, and the painter, after removing the sling, undid the bandages to dress the wound. Ginevra shuddered at the long, broad gash of a sabre on his forearm, and a moan escaped her. The stranger raised his head and smiled to her. There was something touching in the care with which Servin lifted the lint and touched the lacerated flesh, while the wounded man’s face, pale and sickly, expressed, as he looked at the girl, more pleasure than suffering. An artist would have admired the opposition of sentiments and the contrasts of white linen and bared arm against the red and blue uniform.

At that moment a soft half-light pervaded the studio; a parting ray of evening illuminated where the soldier sat, bathing his noble, blanched face, black hair, and clothes in its glow. The effect was simple, but to the girl’s Italian imagination it was an omen. The stranger seemed a celestial messenger, speaking her language, unconsciously conjuring childhood’s memories; in her heart dawned another feeling as fresh and pure as her innocence. For a short moment she was motionless and dreamy, then blushed, exchanged a soft rapid glance with the wounded man, and fled with his vision before her eyes.

The next day was not a class-day, but Ginevra came to the studio, and the prisoner sat beside her easel. Servin, with a sketch to finish, played mentor to the two young people, who talked chiefly in Corsican. The soldier related the sufferings of the retreat from Moscow; at nineteen he had made the passage of the Beresins, and was almost the last left of his regiment. He described, in words of fire, the disaster of Waterloo. His voice was music to the Italian girl. Brought up as a Corsican, Ginevra was, in some sense, a child of Nature; falseness was unknown to her; she gave herself up without reserve to her impressions, acknowledging them, or rather allowing them to be seen without the petty coquetry of Parisian girls. During that day she sat more than once with palette and brushes in her hands without touching a color, eyes fixed on the officer and lips slightly apart, listening in the attitude of painting a stroke never painted. She was not surprised to see such softness in his eyes, for she felt her own soft despite her will to keep them stern. After such pauses she painted diligently, without raising her head, for he was near, watching. The first time he sat by her to contemplate her silently, she said, after a long pause:--

“Does it amuse you to see me paint?”

That day she learned his name was Luigi. They agreed that on class-days when they could not see each other, any important political event would be signaled by Ginevra singing certain Corsican melodies.

The following day Mademoiselle Thirion informed the class, under pledge of secrecy, that Ginevra di Piombo had a lover, a young man who came during lesson hours and concealed himself in the garret.

“You, who take her part,” she said to Mademoiselle Roguin, “watch her carefully, and you will see how she spends her time.”

Ginevra was observed with diabolical attention. They listened to her songs, watched her glances. At times, when she supposed no one saw her, a dozen pairs of eyes were furtively upon her. Thus enlightened, the girls interpreted truly the emotions crossing the features of the beautiful Italian—her gestures, the tones in which she hummed, and the attention with which she listened to sounds only she could hear through the partition.

By the end of a week, Laure was the only one of Servin’s fifteen pupils who had resisted peeking at Luigi through the crevice; and she, through an instinct of weakness, still defended her beautiful friend. Mademoiselle Roguin tried to make her wait on the staircase after class to prove the intimacy by entering the studio and surprising them, but Laure refused to condescend to such espionage, and thus became the object of reprobation.

Soon Mademoiselle Thirion declared it improper to attend classes with a painter whose opinions were tainted with patriotism and Bonapartism (then synonymous), and she ceased to attend. Though she forgot Ginevra, the harm she planted bore fruit. Little by little the other young girls told their mothers of the strange events at the studio. One day Matilde Roguin did not come; the next another was missing, and so on, until the last three or four left. Ginevra and Laure were the sole occupants of the deserted studio for several days.

Ginevra did not observe this falling off nor ask the cause. As soon as she had invented means of communication with Luigi she lived in the studio in a delightful solitude, thinking only of the officer and the dangers that threatened him. Though a sincere admirer of noble characters who never betray their political faiths, she urged Luigi to submit to royal authority to be released and remain in France. He refused. If passions are born and nourished under romantic causes, never did so many such circumstances conjoin to unite two young souls. Their friendship made more progress in a month than a society friendship would in ten years. Adversity is the touchstone of character. Ginevra studied Luigi and soon esteemed him. Older than Luigi, she found charm in being courted by a youth so grand and tried by fate—a youth who joined a man’s experience to adolescent graces. Luigi felt unspeakable pleasure in being apparently protected by a woman of twenty-five. Was it not a proof of love? The union of gentleness and pride, strength and weakness in Ginevra was irresistible, and he was subjugated. In short, they loved each other so profoundly they felt no need to deny or announce their love.

One evening Ginevra heard the accustomed signal. Luigi scratched with a pin on the woodwork, making no more noise than a spider fastening its thread. The signal meant he wished to come out.

Ginevra glanced around, and not seeing Laure, opened the door; but Luigi caught sight of the pupil and abruptly retired. Surprised, Ginevra saw Laure and said as she went to her easel:--

“You are staying late, my dear. That head seems finished; you only want a highlight—see! on that knot of hair.”

“You would do me a great kindness,” said Laure in a trembling voice, “if you would give this copy a few touches; then I could carry away something to remind me of you.”

“Willingly,” said Ginevra, painting a few strokes. “But I thought it was a long way from your home, and it is late.”

“Oh! Ginevra, I am going away, never to return,” cried the poor girl sadly.

“You mean to leave Monsieur Servin!” exclaimed Ginevra, less affected than a month earlier.

“Haven’t you noticed, Ginevra, that for some days past you and I have been alone in the studio?”

“True,” said Ginevra, as if struck by recollection. “Are all those young ladies ill, or going to be married, or are their fathers on duty at court?”

“They have left Monsieur Servin,” replied Laure.

“Why?”

“On your account, Ginevra.”

“My account!” repeated the Corsican, springing up, brow threatening and eyes flashing.

“Oh! don’t be angry, my kind Ginevra,” cried Laure in distress. “My mother insists on my leaving. The young ladies say you have some intrigue, and that Monsieur Servin allows the young man you love to stay in the dark attic. I never believed these calumnies nor told my mother. But last night Madame Roguin met her at a ball and asked if she still sent me here. When my mother answered yes, Madame Roguin told her the falsehoods. Mamma scolded me severely; she said I must have known all, and that I failed in proper confidence between mother and daughter. Oh! my dear Ginevra! I, who took you for my model, how grieved I am that I can’t be your companion.”

“We shall meet again in life; girls marry--” said Ginevra.

“When they are rich,” sighed Laure.

“Come and see me; my father has a fortune--”

“Ginevra,” Laure added tenderly. “Madame Roguin and my mother are coming to see Monsieur Servin tomorrow to reproach him; hadn’t you better warn him?”

A thunderbolt falling at Ginevra’s feet could not have astonished her more.

“What matter is it to them?” she asked, naively.

“Everybody thinks it very wrong. Mamma says it is immoral.”

“And you, Laure, what do you say?”

Laure looked up and their thoughts joined. She could no longer hold back tears; she flung herself on Ginevra’s breast and sobbed. At this moment Servin entered.

“Mademoiselle Ginevra,” he cried with enthusiasm, “I have finished my picture! it is now being varnished. What have you been doing meanwhile? Where are the young ladies; are they on holiday or in the country?”

Laure dried her tears, bowed to Monsieur Servin, and went away.

“The studio has been deserted for some days,” replied Ginevra, “and the young ladies are not coming back.”

“Pooh!”

“Oh! don’t laugh,” said Ginevra. “Listen: I am the involuntary cause of the loss of your reputation--”

The artist smiled and interrupted:--

“My reputation? Why, in a few days my picture will make it at the Exposition.”

“That relates to your talent,” replied the girl. “I speak of your morality. Those young ladies have told their mothers that Luigi was shut up here, and that you lent yourself--to--our love.”

“There is some truth in that, mademoiselle,” replied the professor. “The mothers of those young ladies are foolish; had they come to me I should have explained. But I don’t care a straw! Life is short.”

And the painter snapped his fingers above his head. Luigi, who had heard part of the conversation, came in.

“You have lost all your scholars,” he cried. “I have ruined you!”

The artist took Luigi’s hand and Ginevra’s and joined them.

“Marry one another, my children,” he said, with fatherly kindness.

They both dropped their eyes; their silence was the first avowal of love.

“You will surely be happy,” said Servin. “There is nothing to equal the happiness of two beings like yourselves when bound together in love.”

Luigi pressed his protector’s hand and presently said, in emotion:--

“To you I owe it all.”

“Be happy! I bless and wed you,” said the painter, with comic unction, laying his hands on the lovers’ heads.

This jest ended their strained emotion. All three looked at one another and laughed. Ginevra pressed Luigi’s hand strongly, with a simplicity worthy of her native customs.

“Ah ca, my dear children,” resumed Servin, “you think all will go right now, but you are much mistaken.”

The lovers looked astonished.

“Don’t be anxious. I’m the only one your romance will harm. But Madame Servin is a little straitlaced; I don’t see how to settle it with her.”

“Heavens! and I forgot to tell you,” exclaimed Ginevra, “that Madame Roguin and Laure’s mother are coming here tomorrow to--”

“I understand,” said the painter.

“But you can easily justify yourself,” continued the girl, proudly. “Monsieur Luigi,” she added to him with an arch look, “will no longer object to entering the royal service. Well then,” after his smile, “tomorrow morning I will send a petition to a most influential man at the War ministry,--a man who will refuse nothing to the daughter of the Baron di Piombo. We shall obtain a ‘tacit’ pardon for Captain Luigi, for, of course, they will not allow him the rank of major. And then,” she added to Servin, “you can confound the mothers of my charitable companions by telling them the truth.”

“You are an angel!” cried Servin.

While this passed at the studio, Ginevra’s parents grew anxious at her delay.

“It is six o’clock, and Ginevra not yet home!” cried Bartolomeo.

“She was never so late before,” said his wife.

The two old people looked at one another with unusual anxiety. Too restless to remain, Bartolomeo paced the salon with an active step for a man over seventy-seven. Thanks to a robust constitution he had changed little since arriving in Paris; despite his tall figure he walked erect. His hair, white and sparse, left uncovered a broad protuberant skull suggesting character and firmness. His face, seamed with deep wrinkles, had taken with age a nobler expression, preserving pallid tones that inspire veneration. The ardor of passions lived in the fire of his eyes, while the still-not-wholly-white eyebrows retained terrible mobility. The head’s aspect was stern but conveyed that Piombo had a right to be so. His kindness and gentleness were known only to his wife and daughter. In functions, or before strangers, he never laid aside the majesty time had impressed; the habit of frowning with heavy eyebrows and giving his eyes a Napoleonic fixity made his manner icy.

During his political life he had been so generally feared he seemed unsocial. The life, morals, and fidelity of Piombo made him obnoxious to courtiers. Despite delicate missions entrusted to him which would have been lucrative to others, he possessed an income of not more than thirty thousand francs from an investment in the Grand Livre. Considering cheap government securities under the Empire and Napoleon’s liberality toward faithful servants who asked, the Baron di Piombo must have been a man of stern integrity. He owed his barony to the Emperor’s need to give him a title before sending him on missions to foreign courts.

Bartolomeo always professed hatred for the traitors Napoleon surrounded himself with. It is told that he took three steps to the door of the Emperor’s cabinet after advising him to get rid of three men in France on the eve of the 1814 campaign. After the second Bourbon return Bartolomeo ceased wearing the Legion of Honor. No man better represented those old Republicans, incorruptible friends to the Empire, relics of two energetic governments. Though he displeased courtiers, he had Darus, Drouots, and Carnots as friends. As for other politicians, he cared not a whiff of his cigar’s smoke for them, especially since Waterloo.

Bartolomeo had bought, for the moderate sum Madame Mere had paid him for his Corsican estates, the old Portenduere mansion, in which he made no changes. Lodged usually at government expense, he did not occupy it until after Fontainebleau. Following simple habits, the baron and his wife gave no heed to outward splendor; their furniture was what they bought with the mansion. The grand apartments, lofty, sombre, and bare, the wide mirrors in blackened gilded frames, and Louis XIV–period furniture suited Bartolomeo and his wife, personages worthy of antiquity.

Under the Empire and during the Hundred Days, while exercising well-rewarded functions, the old Corsican maintained a great establishment, more to honor his office than to shine himself. His and his wife’s lives were so frugal and tranquil that their modest fortune sufficed. To them their daughter Ginevra was more precious than all wealth. When in May, 1814, the Baron di Piombo resigned, dismissed his servants, and closed his stable, Ginevra, quiet and unpretending like her parents, saw nothing to regret. Like all great souls, she found luxury in strength of feeling and happiness in quiet and work. These three loved one another too well for externals to matter.

Often, especially after Napoleon’s second fall, Bartolomeo and his wife passed delightful evenings with their daughter, listening while she sang and played. They took vast secret pleasure in her slightest word; their eyes followed her with tender anxiety; they heard her step in the court-yard. Like lovers, the three often sat silently together, understanding better than by speech the eloquence of their souls. This profound sentiment animated their every thought. If memories of Napoleon’s benefits or public events distracted them, they could always return to this source without affecting their community of thought, for Ginevra shared their political passions. What more natural than the ardor with which they found refuge in their only child?

Until now public life had absorbed Bartolomeo’s energy; after leaving office he felt the need to cast it into the last sentiment remaining. Apart from parentage, there may have been another reason for their intense reciprocal love: it was undivided love. Ginevra’s whole heart belonged to her father, as his belonged to her; and if we are bound by defects more than virtues, Ginevra echoed her father’s youthful passions. This was the sole imperfection of their triple life. Ginevra was born unyielding, vindictive, and passionate, like her father.

The Corsican delighted in developing these savage sentiments in his daughter, as a lion teaches lion-cubs to spring at prey. But this apprenticeship to vengeance having no outlet in family life, the child turned the principle against her father; as a child she forgave him nothing, and he yielded. Piombo saw nothing more than childish nonsense in these quarrels, but Ginevra acquired a habit of ruling her parents. Amid the tempests he loved to excite, a look or word of tenderness sufficed to pacify them, and often they were nearest a kiss when threatening vehemently.

Nevertheless, for five years Ginevra, grown wiser, avoided such scenes. Her faithfulness, devotion, love filling her every thought, and admirable good sense overcame her temper. Yet a great evil resulted from her training; she lived with her parents on an equality always dangerous.

Piombo and his wife, without education, allowed Ginevra to study as she pleased. Following youthful caprices she studied many things for a time, abandoning each train of thought until painting proved her dominant passion. Ginevra would have made a noble woman had her mother guided her studies and harmonized her gifts; her defects came from the fatal education the old Corsican delighted in giving her.

After pacing and ringing the bell, a servant entered.

“Go and meet Mademoiselle Ginevra,” said his master.

“I always regret our carriage on her account,” remarked the baroness.

“She said she did not want one,” replied Piombo, looking at his wife, who, used to obedience, lowered her eyes and said no more.

Already a septuagenarian, tall, withered, pale, and wrinkled, the baroness resembled those old women Schnetz paints in Italian genre scenes. She was habitually silent, sometimes seeming another Mrs. Shandy; occasionally a word or look betrayed that her feelings retained youthful vigor. Her dress, devoid of coquetry, was often in bad taste. She usually sat passive, buried in a low sofa like a Sultana Valide, awaiting or admiring her Ginevra. All was well with her if Ginevra was happy. Her hair was white, and a few strands only showed above her wrinkled forehead and hollow cheeks.

“It is now fifteen days,” she said, “since Ginevra made a practice of being late.”

“Jean is so slow!” cried the impatient old man, buttoning his blue coat and seizing his hat, which he dashed on as he took his cane and departed.

“You will not get far,” said his wife, calling after him.

As she spoke the porte-cochere opened and shut, and the old mother heard Ginevra’s steps in the court-yard. Bartolomeo almost instantly reappeared, carrying his daughter, who struggled in his arms.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER IV. LOVE


“Here she is, my Ginevra, Ginevrettina, Ginevrola, mia Ginevra bella!”
 cried the old man.

“Oh, father, you hurt me!”

Ginevra was instantly put down with respect. She nodded to her mother,
who was frightened by the cry, as if to say, “Don’t be alarmed, it was
only a trick to get away.”

The pale, wan face of the baroness recovered its usual tones and even
assumed gayety. Piombo rubbed his hands violently—his surest sign of
joy; he had acquired the habit at court when Napoleon became angry
with those who served him ill. When Piombo’s facial muscles relaxed,
every wrinkle on his forehead expressed benevolence. These two old people
looked like a drooping plant to which a little water had given fresh life.

“Now, to dinner! to dinner!” cried the baron, offering his large hand to
his daughter, whom he called “Signora Piombellina”—another sign of
gayety, to which Ginevra replied with a smile.

“Ah ca!” said Piombo as they left the table. “Your mother tells me you
have stayed at the studio much longer than usual. It seems painting is
more to you than your parents—”

“Oh, father!”

“Ginevra is preparing some surprise for us, I think,” said the mother.

“A picture of your own! will you bring us that?” cried the Corsican,
clapping his hands.

“Yes, I am very much occupied at the studio,” replied Ginevra slowly.

“What is the matter, Ginevra? You are turning pale!” cried her mother.

“No!” exclaimed the girl with resolution,—“no! it shall never be said
that Ginevra Piombo acted a lie.”

Piombo and his wife looked at her in astonishment.

“I love a young man,” she added, voice full of feeling, lowering her
eyelids as if to veil the fire of her eyes.

“Is he a prince?” asked her father ironically, in a tone that made the
mother quail.

“No, father,” she said gently, “he is a young man without fortune.”

“Is he very handsome?”

“He is very unfortunate.”

“What is he?”

“Labedoyere’s comrade; he was proscribed, without a refuge; Servin
concealed him, and—”

“Servin is a good fellow,” cried Piombo, “but you, my daughter, you do
wrong to love any man except your father.”

“It does not depend on me to love, or not to love,” replied Ginevra.

“I flattered myself,” continued her father, “that my Ginevra would be
faithful to me until I died; and that my love and that of her mother
would suffice her till then; I did not expect our tenderness would find
a rival in her soul, and—”

“Did I ever reproach you for your fanaticism for Napoleon?” said
Ginevra. “Have you never loved any one but me? Did you not leave me
for months when you went on missions? I bore your absence courageously.
Life has necessities to which we must all submit.”

“Ginevra!”

“No, you don’t love me for myself; your reproaches betray intolerable
egotism.”

“You dare blame your father’s love!” exclaimed Piombo, eyes flashing.

“Father, I don’t blame you,” replied Ginevra, more gentle than her
trembling mother expected. “You have grounds for your egotism, as I have
for my love. Heaven is my witness that no girl has fulfilled her duty
to her parents better than I. I have never felt anything but love and
happiness where others see obligation. It is now fifteen years that I
have never left your wing, and it has been a dear pleasure to charm your
life. But is it ingratitude to desire a husband who will protect me
hereafter?”

“What! do you reckon benefits with your father, Ginevra?” said Piombo
in a dangerous tone.

A dreadful pause followed. Bartolomeo at last broke the silence in a
heart-rending tone:—

“Oh! stay with us! stay with your father, your old father! I cannot
have you love another man. Ginevra, you will not have long to await
your liberty.”

“But, father, remember I need not leave you; we shall be two to love
you; you will learn the man to whose care you bequeath me. You will be
doubly cherished—by him who is my other self, by me who am all his.”

“Oh! Ginevra, Ginevra!” cried the Corsican, clenching his fists; “why
did you not marry when Napoleon brought me to accept the idea? Why did
you not take the counts and dukes he presented?”

“They loved me to order,” she said. “Besides, they would have made me
live with them, and I did not wish to leave you alone.”

“You don’t wish to leave me alone,” said Piombo, “and yet you marry!—
that is leaving me alone. I know you, my daughter; in that case, you
would cease to love us. Elisa,” he added, looking at his wife who was
motionless as if stupefied, “we have no longer a daughter; she wishes
to marry.”

The old man sat down, raised his hands to heaven as if invoking Divine
power; then bowed himself over as if weighed down with sorrow.

Ginevra saw his agitation, and the restraint with which he checked his
anger touched her to the heart; she had expected a violent crisis; she
had not armed her soul against paternal gentleness.

“Father,” she said tenderly, “no, you shall never be abandoned by your
Ginevra. But love her a little for her own sake. If you knew how he
loves me! Ah! He would never make me unhappy!”

“Comparisons already!” cried Piombo, terrible. “No, I can never endure
the idea of your marriage. If he loved you as you deserve he would
kill me; if he did not love you, I should put a dagger through him.”

His hands and lips trembled, his body trembled, but his eyes flashed
lightnings. Ginevra alone matched his look, her eyes flaming; the
daughter was worthy of the sire.

“Oh! to love you! What man is worthy of such a life?” Piombo continued.
“To love you as a father is paradise on earth; who is there worthy to be
your husband?”

“He,” said Ginevra; “he of whom I am not worthy.”

“He?” repeated Piombo mechanically; “who is he?”

“He whom I love.”

“How can he know you enough to love you?”

“Father,” said Ginevra with impatience, “whether he loves me or not, if
I love him—”

“You love him?” cried Piombo.

Ginevra bent her head softly.

“You love him more than you love us?”

“The two feelings cannot be compared,” she replied.

“Is one stronger than the other?”

“I think it is,” said Ginevra.

“You shall not marry him,” cried the Corsican, his voice shaking the
window-panes.

“I shall marry him,” replied Ginevra, tranquilly.

“Oh, God!” cried the mother, “how will this quarrel end? Santa Virgina!
place thyself between them!”

The baron, who had been striding, now sat; an icy sternness darkened his
face; he looked fixedly at his daughter, and said in a weak gentle voice:—

“Ginevra, no! you will not marry him. Oh! say nothing more to-night—let
me think the contrary. Do you wish to see your father on his knees,
his white hairs prostrate before you? I supplicate you—”

“Ginevra Piombo does not pass her word and break it,” she replied.
“I am your daughter.”

“She is right,” said the baroness. “We are sent into the world to
marry.”

“Do you encourage her in disobedience?” said the baron to his wife, who,
terrified, now changed to marble.

“Refusing to obey an unjust order is not disobedience,” said Ginevra.

“No order can be unjust from the lips of your father, my daughter. Why
do you judge my action? The repugnance I feel is counsel from on high,
sent perhaps to protect you from some great evil.”

“The only evil could be that he did not love me.”

“Always he!”

“Yes, always,” she answered. “He is my life, my good, my thought. Even
if I obeyed you he would be ever in my soul. To forbid me to marry
him is to make me hate you.”

“You love us not!” cried Piombo.

“Oh!” said Ginevra, shaking her head.

“Well, then forget him; be faithful to us. After we are gone—you
understand?”

“Father, do you wish me to long for your death?” cried Ginevra.

“I shall outlive you. Children who do not honor their parents die
early,” said the father, driven to exasperation.

“All the more reason why I should marry and be happy,” she replied.

This coolness and power of argument increased Piombo’s trouble; the
blood rushed to his head, his face turned purple. Ginevra shuddered;
she sprang like a bird on her father’s knee, threw her arms around his
neck, and caressed his white hair, exclaiming tenderly:—

“Oh, yes, yes, let me die first! I could never survive you, my father,
my kind father!”

“Oh! my Ginevra, my own Ginevra!” replied Piombo, whose anger melted
under this caress like snow beneath the sun.

“It was time you ceased,” said the baroness, trembling.

“Poor mother!”

“Ah! Ginevretta! mia bella Ginevra!”

The father played with his daughter as though she were six. He amused
himself by releasing the waving volume of her hair, by dandling her on
his knee; there was something of madness in these expressions of his
love. Presently she scolded while kissing him, and tried by jesting to
obtain admission for Luigi; but her father, also jesting, refused. She
sulked, coaxed again, and sulked until, by the end of the evening, she
had impressed on her father both her love for Luigi and the idea of an
approaching marriage.

The next day she said no more about her love; she was more caressing
to her father than ever, and testified the utmost gratitude, as if to
thank him for the consent he seemed to have given by silence. That
evening she sang and played to him long, exclaiming now and then:
“We want a man’s voice for this nocturne.” Ginevra was an Italian, and
that says all.

At the end of a week her mother signed to her. Ginevra went; Elisa
Piombo whispered:—

“I have persuaded your father to receive him.”

“Oh! mother, how happy you have made me!”

That day Ginevra had the joy of coming home on Luigi’s arm. The officer
came out of hiding for the second time. Ginevra’s earnest appeals to
the Duc de Feltre, then minister of war, had succeeded. Luigi’s name
was replaced upon the roll of officers awaiting orders. This was the
first great step. Warned by Ginevra of the difficulties he would meet with
her father, the young man dared not express his fear of offending the
old man. Courageous under adversity, brave on the battlefield, he
trembled at the thought of entering Piombo’s salon. Ginevra felt him
tremble; this emotion, the source of which lay in her, was to her another
proof of love.

“How pale you are!” she said when they reached the house.

“Oh! Ginevra, if it concerned my life only—”

Though Bartolomeo had been notified of the presentation, he would not
advance to meet him, but remained seated in his arm-chair; the sternness
of his brow was awful.

“Father,” said Ginevra, “I bring you a person you will no doubt be
pleased to see,—a soldier who fought beside the Emperor at Mont-Saint-Jean.”

The baron rose, cast a sidelong glance at Luigi, and said in a sardonic
tone:—

“Monsieur is not decorated.”

“I no longer wear the Legion of honor,” replied Luigi timidly.

Mortified by her father’s incivility, Ginevra dragged forward a chair.
The officer’s answer seemed to satisfy the old servant of Napoleon.
Madame Piombo, seeing her husband’s eyebrows resume their natural
position, said by way of conversation:

“Monsieur’s resemblance to a person we knew in Corsica, Nina Porta,
is really surprising.”

“Nothing could be more natural,” replied the young man, on whom
Piombo’s flaming eyes now rested. “Nina was my sister.”

“Are you Luigi Porta?” asked the old man.

“Yes.”

Bartolomeo rose, tottered, leaned against a chair and beckoned his
wife. Elisa Piombo came. Then the two old people, each supporting the
other, left the room, abandoning their daughter with a sort of horror.

Luigi, bewildered, looked at Ginevra, who had turned as white as marble,
and stood gazing at the door through which her parents had disappeared.
This departure and silence seemed so solemn that, for the first time,
a feeling of fear entered her. She struck her hands together and said
in a voice so shaken that only a lover could catch the words:—

“What misery in a word!”

“In the name of our love, what have I said?” asked Luigi.

“My father,” she replied, “never spoke to me of our deplorable history,
and I was too young when we left Corsica to know anything.”

“Are we in vendetta?” asked Luigi, trembling.

“Yes.” The girl smiled sadly and bowed. Then raised her head with pride:—

“Oh, Luigi, our love must be pure and sincere to give me strength to
tread the path I am about to enter. But it involves a happiness that
will last throughout our lives, will it not?”

Luigi answered with a smile and pressed her hand.

Ginevra understood that true love could despise vulgar protestations at
such a moment. His calm and restrained expression foreshadowed their
strength.

The destiny of the pair was decided. Ginevra foresaw a cruel struggle,
but the idea of abandoning Luigi vanished. She dragged him from her
father’s house with desperate energy, and did not leave him until she
saw him reach the lodging Servin had found.

By the time she returned, Ginevra had attained the serenity of firm
resolution; no sign of uneasiness showed. She turned on her parents, whom
she found about to dine, with a gentle glance devoid of hardihood. She
saw her mother had been weeping; the redness of those withered eyelids
shook her heart, but she hid her emotion. No one touched the dinner.
All three rose from table without a word.

When Ginevra placed herself between her parents in the gloomy salon,
Piombo tried to speak but his voice failed; he tried to walk but had no
strength. He rang the bell.

“Pietro,” he said at last, “light the fire; I am cold.”

Ginevra trembled and watched him anxiously. The struggle within him
must have been horrible; his face was distorted. Ginevra knew the peril,
but did not flinch. Bartolomeo cast furtive glances at his daughter, as
if fearing a character whose violence he had formed.

Between such natures all things were extreme. The certainty of impending
change in father and daughter gave the baroness an expression of terror.

“Ginevra, you love the enemy of your family,” said Piombo at last, not
daring to look at her.

“That is true,” she replied.

“You must choose between us. Our vendetta is a part of our being.
Whoso does not share my vengeance is not a member of my family.”

“My choice is made,” replied Ginevra calmly.

His daughter’s tranquillity misled Bartolomeo.

“Oh! my dear child!” he cried, letting her see his eyes moistened with
tears, the first and only tears he ever shed.

“I shall be his wife,” said Ginevra abruptly.

Bartolomeo seemed dazed but recovered his coolness and replied:—

“The marriage will not take place in my lifetime; I will never consent.”

Ginevra was silent.

“Ginevra,” continued the baron, “have you reflected that Luigi is the
son of the man who killed your brother?”

“He was six when that crime was committed; he was therefore not guilty,”
she replied.

“He is a Porta!” cried Bartolomeo.

“I have never shared that hatred,” said Ginevra eagerly. “You did not
bring me up to think a Porta must be a monster. How could I know one
you thought you had killed survived? Is it not natural you should yield
your vendetta to my feelings?”

“A Porta!” repeated Piombo. “If his father had found you in your bed
you would not be living now; he would have taken your life a hundred
times.”

“It may be so,” she answered; “but his son has given me life, and more
than life. To see Luigi is a happiness without which I cannot live.
Luigi has revealed to me the world of sentiments. I may have seen faces
more beautiful than his, but none has charmed me thus; I may have heard
voices—no, never any so melodious! Luigi loves me; he will be my husband.”

“Never,” said Piombo. “I would rather see you in your coffin, Ginevra.”

The old Corsican rose and strode up and down, dropping sentences after
pauses that betrayed his agitation.

“You think you can bend my will. Undeceive yourself. A Porta shall
never be my son; that is my decree. Let there be no further question
between us. I am Bartolomeo di Piombo; do you hear me, Ginevra?”

“Do you attach some mysterious meaning to those words?” she asked coldly.

“They mean that I have a dagger, and that I do not fear man’s justice.
Corsicans explain themselves to God.”

“And I,” said the daughter rising, “am Ginevra Piombo, and I declare
that within six months I shall be the wife of Luigi Porta. You are a
tyrant, my father,” she added after a terrifying pause.

Bartolomeo clenched his fists and struck them on the marble mantel.

“Ah! we are in Paris!” he muttered.

Then he was silent, crossed his arms, bowed his head, and said nothing
more that evening.

After once declaring her will, Ginevra affected inconceivable coolness.
She opened the piano and sang, played nocturnes and scherzos with grace
and sentiment displaying perfect freedom, thus triumphing over her
father, whose dark face showed no softening. The old man was cruelly
hurt by this tacit insult; he gathered bitter fruits of the training he
had given his daughter. Respect is a barrier that spares grief to parents
and remorse to children.

The next day when Ginevra sought to leave at her usual hour she found
the gates closed. She said nothing but managed to inform Luigi of her
father’s severity. A chambermaid, who could neither read nor write,
carried letters between the lovers. For five days they corresponded
thus, thanks to the youth’s invention.

Father and daughter seldom spoke. Both nursed hatred in their hearts;
they suffered proudly and in silence. Each tried to break their ties but
without success. No gentle thought brightened Piombo’s face at sight of
his Ginevra. The girl had something savage in her eye when she looked
at him; reproach sat on that innocent brow; she gave herself to happy
thoughts, yet at times remorse dulled her eyes. It was not difficult to
believe she could never enjoy peacefully any happiness that caused her
parents sorrow.

With Bartolomeo, as with his daughter, hesitations caused by native
goodness yielded to pride and the rancor of their Corsican nature. They
encouraged each other in anger and closed their eyes to the future,
perhaps flattering themselves the other would yield.

At last, on Ginevra’s birthday, her mother, despairing at the growing
estrangement, attempted to reconcile them by recalling family memories.
They were all three sitting in Bartolomeo’s study. Ginevra guessed her
mother’s aim by her hesitation and smiled sadly.

A servant announced two notaries with witnesses. Bartolomeo looked
fixedly at these persons whose cold formal faces grated on souls so
strained. The old man turned to his daughter uneasy. He saw on her face
a triumphant smile that made him expect a shock, but affected to maintain
deceitful indifference as he gazed at the notaries. They sat after his
gesture.

“Monsieur is, no doubt, M. le Baron di Piombo?” began the oldest.

Bartolomeo bowed. The notary glanced at Ginevra with a sly look, took
out his snuff-box, opened it, and slowly inhaled as if seeking words;
then, making continual pauses, he began:—

“Monsieur, I am Monsieur Roguin, your daughter’s notary, and we have
come—my colleague and I—to fulfil the intentions of the law and—put
an end to the divisions which—appear—to exist—between yourself and
Mademoiselle, your daughter—on the subject—of—her—marriage with
Monsieur Luigi Porta.”

This pedantic delivery probably amused Roguin. He paused and looked at
Bartolomeo with the familiar air of a business lawyer. Notaries feign
interest and wear a mask of benevolence that irritated Bartolomeo so he
had to collect all his reason to prevent throwing Roguin through the
window. Anger ran through his wrinkles causing the notary to think,
“I’ve produced an effect.”

“But,” Roguin continued in honeyed tones, “monsieur le baron, on such
occasions our duties are preceded by—efforts at—conciliation—Deign
to listen. It is in evidence that Mademoiselle Ginevra di Piombo—attains
this very day—the age at which the law allows a respectful summons
before marriage despite parental non-consent. Now—it is usual in
honorable families—to avoid publicizing differences—and not to injure
the future of a young couple—for whenever a young lady has recourse to
respectful summons she exhibits determination too marked to allow a
father or mother,” here he turned to the baroness, “hoping she will
follow their wishes—Paternal resistance being null—by reason of that
fact—and also from law—it is customary—for every sensible man—after
a final remonstrance—to leave her at liberty—”

Roguin stopped, seeing he might talk for two hours without answer; he
felt a singular emotion at the man before him. An extraordinary change
had taken place on Piombo’s face; his wrinkles contracted into narrow
lines giving him an indescribable cruelty; he cast the look of a tiger.
The baroness was mute and passive. Ginevra, calm and resolute, waited
silently; she knew the notary’s voice more potent than hers and seemed
determined to say nothing. When Roguin ceased, the scene was so
terrifying the witnesses trembled. The notaries looked at each other,
consulted, and walked to the window.

“Did you ever meet people born into the world like that?” Roguin asked
his colleague.

“You can’t get anything out of him,” replied the younger. “In your
place read the summons. That old fellow isn’t a comfortable person; he’s
furious, and you’ll gain nothing arguing with him.”

Roguin then read a stamped paper containing the respectful summons;
after which he asked Bartolomeo his answer.

“Are there laws in France which destroy paternal authority?” demanded
the Corsican.

“Monsieur—” said Roguin.

“Which tear a daughter from her father?”

“Monsieur—”

“Which deprive an old man of his last consolation?”

“Monsieur, your daughter only belongs to you if—”

“And kill him?”

“Monsieur, permit me—”

There is nothing more horrible than the cool precise reasoning of
notaries amid passionate scenes.

The forms about him seemed to Piombo escaped from hell; his repressed
rage knew no bounds as the calm fluted “permit me.” Suddenly he sprang
to a dagger hanging above the fireplace and rushed toward his daughter.
The younger notary and a witness threw themselves before Ginevra; Piombo
knocked them down, his face on fire and eyes casting flames. When Ginevra
saw him approach she looked at him with triumph and slowly knelt.

“No, no! I cannot!” he cried, flinging away the weapon, which buried
itself in the wainscot.

“Well, then! have mercy! have pity!” she said. “You hesitate to be my
death and refuse me life! Oh! father, never have I loved you as I do
at this moment; give me Luigi! I ask your consent upon my knees: a
daughter can humble herself before her father. Luigi, give me my Luigi,
or I die!”

The violent excitement that suffocated her stopped her words; her
convulsive movements showed she lay between life and death. Bartolomeo
roughly pushed her away.

“Go,” he said. “The wife of Luigi Porta cannot be a Piombo. I have no
daughter. I have not the strength to curse you, but I cast you off;
you have no father. My Ginevra Piombo is buried here,” he said deeply,
pressing his heart. “Go, leave my house, unhappy girl,” he added after
a pause. He took her by the arm to the gate and silently put her out.

“Luigi!” cried Ginevra entering her lover’s humble lodging, “my Luigi,
we have no other fortune than our love.”

“Then am I richer than the kings of the earth!” he cried.

“My father and my mother have cast me off,” she said in deepest sadness.

“I will love you in place of them.”

“Then let us be happy—we WILL be happy!” she cried with a gayety that
had something dreadful.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The day after Ginevra was driven from her father’s house she went to ask Madame Servin for asylum and protection until the period fixed by law for her marriage to Luigi.

Here began for her that apprenticeship to trouble which the world strews about the path of those who do not follow its conventions. Madame Servin received her coldly, annoyed at the harm Ginevra’s affair had inflicted on her husband, and politely told her she must not count on future help. Too proud to persist, but amazed at a selfishness hitherto unknown to her, the girl took a room in the lodging-house nearest Luigi’s. The son of the Portas spent all his days at the feet of his future wife; his youthful love and pure words dispersed the clouds from the mind of the banished daughter; the future he painted was so beautiful that she ended by smiling joyfully, though without forgetting her father’s severity.

One morning the lodging-house servant brought to Ginevra a number of trunks and packages containing stuffs, linen, clothes, and many articles necessary for a young wife setting up a home. In this welcome provision she recognized her mother’s foresight, and, on examining the gifts, she found a purse in which the baroness had put Ginevra’s money, adding her own savings. The purse was accompanied by a letter in which the mother implored her to forego the fatal marriage if still possible. It had cost her untold difficulty to send these few things; she entreated her daughter not to think her hard if she were henceforth forced to abandon her to want; she feared she could never again assist her; but she blessed and prayed for her happiness in this fatal marriage, if indeed she persisted, assuring her she should never cease to think of her darling child. Tears had effaced some words.

“Oh, mother!” cried Ginevra, deeply moved.

She felt the impulse to rush home, breathe the blessed air of her father’s house, fling herself at his feet, to see her mother. She was springing forward to accomplish this wish when Luigi entered. At the sight of him her filial emotion vanished; her tears stopped, and she no longer had the strength to abandon that loving and unfortunate youth. To be the sole hope of a noble being, to love him and then abandon him—such sacrifice is treachery young hearts cannot commit. Ginevra had the generosity to bury her own grief and suffering silently in her soul.

The marriage day arrived. Ginevra had no friend with her. While she was dressing, Luigi fetched the witnesses needed to sign the certificate. They were worthy men: one, a cavalry sergeant, was under obligations to Luigi contracted on the battlefield—obligations never obliterated from the heart of an honest man; the other, a master-mason, owned the house where the young couple had hired their future apartment. Each witness brought a friend, and all four, with Luigi, came to escort the bride. Little accustomed to social functions, and seeing only a matter of business, they were dressed in ordinary clothes, without luxury, and nothing about them denoted the usual joy of a marriage procession.

Ginevra herself was dressed simply, as befitted her fortunes; yet her beauty was so noble and imposing that the witnesses’ customary greetings died on their lips. They bowed with respect; she returned the bow; they did so in silence, looking at her with admiration. This reserve cast a chill over the whole party. Joy never bursts forth freely except among equals. Thus chance made all dull and grave around the bridal pair; nothing outwardly reflected the happiness within their hearts.

The church and the mayor’s office being near, Luigi and Ginevra, followed by the four required witnesses, walked the distance with a simplicity that stripped pomp from this greatest social event. They saw a crowd of waiting carriages in the mayor’s court-yard; in the great hall where civil marriages take place they found two other wedding-parties impatiently awaiting the mayor.

Ginevra sat beside Luigi at the end of a long bench; their witnesses remained standing for want of seats. Two brides, elaborately dressed in white with ribbons, laces, and pearls, crowned with orange-blossoms whose satiny petals nodded beneath their veils, were surrounded by joyous families and their mothers, to whom they looked up with content and timid eyes; all the faces reflected happiness and seemed to invoke blessings on the youthful pairs. Fathers, witnesses, brothers, and sisters went and came like a happy swarm disporting in the sun. Each seemed impressed with the value of this passing moment when the heart sits between two hopes—the wishes of the past, the promises of the future.

As she watched them, Ginevra’s heart swelled; she pressed Luigi’s arm and gave him a look. A tear rolled from the young Corsican’s eyes; never did he so well understand the joys his Ginevra was sacrificing to him. That precious tear caused her to forget all else but him—even the abandonment in which she sat. Love poured down its treasures of light upon their hearts; they saw nothing but themselves amid the joyous tumult; they were there alone in that crowd, as they were destined to be henceforth in life. Their witnesses, indifferent, conversed quietly on their own affairs.

“Oats are very dear,” said the sergeant to the mason.

“But they have not gone up like lime, relatively speaking,” replied the contractor.

Then they walked round the hall.

“How one loses time here,” said the mason, replacing a thick silver watch in his fob.

Luigi and Ginevra, sitting pressed to one another, seemed like one person. A poet would have admired their two heads inspired by the same sentiment, colored in the same tones, silent and saddened amid that humming happiness sparkling in diamonds and gay with flowers—a gaiety with something fleeting. The joy of those noisy, splendid groups was visible; that of Ginevra and Luigi was buried in their bosom. On one side the tumult of common pleasure, on the other the delicate silence of happy souls—earth and heaven!

But Ginevra was not wholly free from female weakness. Superstitious as an Italian, she saw an omen in this contrast, and felt a terror as invincible as her love.

Suddenly the office servant in the town livery opened a folding-door. Silence reigned, and his voice, like a dog’s yapping, called Monsieur Luigi da Porta and Mademoiselle Ginevra di Piombo. This caused some embarrassment. The celebrity of the bride’s name attracted attention, and spectators seemed to wonder that the wedding was not more sumptuous. Ginevra rose, took Luigi’s arm, and advanced firmly, followed by the witnesses. A murmur of surprise increased; a general whisper reminded her that all were wondering at the absence of her parents; her father’s wrath seemed present.

“Call in the families,” said the mayor to the clerk who read aloud the certificates.

“The father and mother protest,” replied the clerk, phlegmatically.

“On both sides?” inquired the mayor.

“The groom is an orphan.”

“Where are the witnesses?”

“Here,” said the clerk, pointing to the four men, who stood with arms folded like statues.

“But if the parents protest—” began the mayor.

“The respectful summons has been duly served,” replied the clerk, rising to lay before the mayor the papers annexed to the certificate.

This bureaucratic decision had something blighting; in a few words it contained the whole story. The hatreds of the Portas and the Piombos and their terrible passions were inscribed on this page of civil law as annals of a people (perhaps contained, in one word—Napoleon, Robespierre) are engraved on a tombstone. Ginevra trembled. Like the dove on the waters, having no resting place but the ark, she could take refuge only in Luigi’s eyes amid the cold waste around her.

The mayor assumed a stern, disapproving air, and his clerk looked up with malicious curiosity. No marriage was ever so little festal. Like other humans deprived of accessories, it became a simple act in itself, great only in thought.

After a few questions, to which the bride and bridegroom responded, and a few words mumbled by the mayor, and after signing the registers with their witnesses duly, Luigi and Ginevra were made one. Then the wedded pair walked back through two lines of joyous relations who did not belong to them, and whose only interest in their marriage was the delay caused to their own weddings by this gloomy bridal. When Ginevra finally found herself in the mayor’s court-yard, under the open sky, a sigh escaped her.

“Can a lifetime of devotion and love suffice to prove my gratitude for your courage and tenderness, my Ginevra?” said Luigi.

At these words, spoken with tears of joy, the bride forgot her sufferings; she had indeed suffered to appear before the public to obtain a happiness her parents refused to sanction.

“Why should others come between us?” she said with artless feeling that delighted Luigi.

A sense of accomplished happiness lightened the young pair’s step; they saw neither heaven nor earth nor houses; they flew, as it were, on wings to the church. When they reached a dark little chapel in one corner of the building and stood before a plain undecorated altar, an old priest married them. There, as in the mayor’s office, two other marriages were taking place, still pursuing them with pomp. The church, filled with friends and relations, echoed with the roll of carriages and the hum of beadles, sextons, and priests. Altars glowed with sacramental luxury; the wreaths of orange-flowers that crowned the Virgin were fresh. Flowers, incense, gleaming tapers, velvet cushions embroidered with gold were everywhere. When it came to hold above Luigi and Ginevra the symbol of eternal union—that yoke of satin, white, soft, brilliant, light for some, lead for most—the priest looked about in vain for the acolytes whose place it was to perform that joyous function. Two of the witnesses fulfilled it. The priest addressed a hasty homily on life’s perils and duties, throwing in an indirect reproach to Ginevra for her parents’ absence; then, after uniting them before God as the mayor had before the law, he left the married couple.

“God bless them!” said Vergniaud, the sergeant, to the mason at the church porch. “No two creatures were ever more fitted for one another. The parents are foolish. I don’t know a braver soldier than Colonel Luigi. If the whole army had behaved like him, ‘l’autre’ would be here still.”

This blessing of the old soldier, the only one bestowed on their marriage-day, shed a balm on Ginevra’s heart.

They parted with hearty handshakes; Luigi thanked his landlord.

“Adieu, ‘mon brave,’” he said to the sergeant. “I thank you.”

“I am now and ever at your service, colonel—soul, body, horses, and carriages; all that is mine is yours.”

“How he loves you!” said Ginevra.

Luigi hurried his bride to the house they were to occupy. Their modest apartment was soon reached; and there, when the door closed upon them, Luigi took his wife in his arms, exclaiming,—

“Oh, my Ginevra! for now you are mine, here is our true wedding. Here,” he added, “all things will smile upon us.”

Together they toured the three rooms of their lodging. The first served as salon and dining-room; on the right was a bedchamber; on the left a large study Luigi had arranged for his wife; in it she found easels, color-boxes, lay-figures, casts, pictures, portfolios—in short, an artist’s paraphernalia.

“So here I am to work!” she said with childlike happiness.

She looked long at the hangings and furniture, turning again and again to thank Luigi, for there was something approaching magnificence in the little retreat. A bookcase held her favorite books; a piano filled an angle. She sat on a divan, drew Luigi to her side, and said, caressing his hand,—

“You have good taste.”

“Those words make me happy,” he replied.

“But let me see all,” said Ginevra, to whom Luigi had made a mystery of the adornment.

They entered the nuptial chamber, fresh and white as a virgin.

“Oh! come away,” said Luigi, smiling.

“But I wish to see all.”

The imperious Ginevra looked at each piece of furniture with the minute care of an antiquary examining a coin; she touched the silken hangings and went over every article with the artless satisfaction of a bride inspecting the treasures of her wedding outfit.

“We begin by ruining ourselves,” she said in a half-joyous, half-anxious tone.

“True! for all my back pay is there,” replied Luigi. “I have mortgaged it to a worthy fellow named Gigonnet.”

“Why did you do so?” she asked reproachfully, though inwardly pleased. “Do you believe I should be less happy in a garret? But,” she added, “it is all charming—and it is ours!”

Luigi looked at her with such enthusiasm that she lowered her eyes.

“Now let us see the rest,” she cried.

Above these three rooms, under the roof, were Luigi’s study, a kitchen, and a servant’s room. Ginevra was pleased with her little domain, though the view from the windows was limited by a high neighboring wall, and the court-yard, from which their light came, was gloomy. But the two lovers were so happy that hope adorned their future, and they chose to see nothing but what was charming in their hidden nest. In that vast house, lost in the immensity of Paris, they were like two pearls in their shell in the depths of the ocean; to others it might seem a prison; to them it was paradise.

The first few days of their union were given to love. The effort to work at once was too difficult; they could not resist their passion. Luigi lay for hours at his wife’s feet, admiring the color of her hair, the moulding of her forehead, the enchanting sockets of her eyes, the purity and whiteness of the two arches beneath which she turned her eyes slowly, expressing the happiness of satisfied love. Ginevra caressed Luigi’s hair, never weary of gazing at his “belta folgorante,” and the delicacy of his features. She was constantly charmed by the nobility of his manners, as she herself attracted him by her grace.

They played together like children with nothings—nothings that brought them back to their love—ceasing their play only to fall into reveries of far niente. An air sung by Ginevra reproduced to their souls the lights and shadows of their passion. Together, uniting their steps as they did their souls, they roamed the country, finding their love everywhere—in flowers, in the sky, in the glowing tints of sunset; they read it in the capricious vapors that met and struggled in the ether. Each day resembled none before; their love increased because it was true. They had tested each other in what seemed only a short time; instinctively they recognized that their souls were of a kind whose inexhaustible riches promised unceasing joys.

Theirs was love in all its artlessness, with interminable conversations, unfinished speeches, long silences, oriental reposes, and ardor. Luigi and Ginevra comprehended love. Love is like the ocean: seen superficially or in haste it seems monotonous to common souls, whereas some privileged beings can pass their lives admiring it and finding ceaselessly varying phenomena that enchant them.

Soon, however, prudence and foresight drew the young couple from their Eden; it was necessary to work to live. Ginevra, with a talent for imitating old paintings, took up copying and soon found many customers among picture-dealers. Luigi, whose talents had been restricted to strategy, sought long and actively for occupation, but it was hard for a young officer in Paris.

At last, weary of vain efforts and despairing at seeing the whole burden fall on Ginevra, he made use of his excellent handwriting. With persistency he went among layers and notaries asking for papers to copy. The frankness of his manners and his situation interested many; he soon obtained enough work to need assistants, and this employment became little by little a regular business. The profits of his office and the sale of Ginevra’s pictures gave the young couple a competence they were justly proud of, for it was the fruit of their industry.

This, to the busy pair, was the happiest period of their lives. Days flowed rapidly, filled with occupation and the joys of love. At night, after working all day, they met with delight in Ginevra’s studio. Music refreshed their weariness. No expression of regret or melancholy clouded the young wife’s features; she never complained. She appeared to Luigi with a smile and eyes beaming. Each cherished a ruling thought that would have made them take pleasure in still severer labor: Ginevra worked for Luigi, and Luigi for Ginevra.

Sometimes, in his absence, Ginevra imagined the perfect happiness they might have had if this life of love could have been lived in her parents’ presence; the thought of remorse dropped her into melancholy; mournful pictures passed like shadows across her imagination; she saw her old father alone, or her mother weeping in secret lest the inexorable Piombo perceive her tears. The two white, solemn heads rose before her, and she felt that never again should she see them except in memory. This thought pursued her like a presentiment.

She celebrated the anniversary of her marriage by giving her husband a portrait he had long desired—the portrait of his Ginevra, painted by herself. Never had the young artist done so remarkable a work. Aside from the resemblance, the glow of her beauty, the purity of her feelings, the happiness of love were there depicted by a sort of magic. This masterpiece of her art and joy was a votive offering to their wedded felicity.

Another year of ease and comfort went by. The history of their life may be given in three words: They were happy. No event happened to them of sufficient importance to be recorded.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER VI. RETRIBUTION


At the beginning of the year 1819 the picture-dealers requested Ginevra
to give them something beside copies; competition had so increased
that they could no longer sell her work to advantage. Madame Porta then
perceived the mistake she had made in not exercising her talent
for “genre” painting, which might, by this time, have brought her
reputation. She now attempted portrait-painting. But here she had to
compete against a crowd of artists in greater need of money than
herself. However, as Luigi and Ginevra had laid by a few savings, they
were not, as yet, uneasy about the future.

Toward the end of the winter Luigi worked without
intermission. He, too, was struggling against competitors. Payment
for writing had so decreased that he found it impossible to employ
assistance; he was forced, therefore, to work much longer himself
to obtain the same emolument. His wife had finished several pictures
which were not without merit; but the dealers were scarcely buying those
of artists with reputations; consequently, her paintings had little
chance. Ginevra offered them for almost nothing, but without success.

Household danger began to loom. The souls
of the husband and wife floated on the ocean of their happiness,
love overwhelmed them with its treasures, while poverty rose, like a
skeleton, amid their harvest of joy. Yet they hid from each other their secret anxiety. When Ginevra felt like weeping as she
watched Luigi’s worn and suffering face, she redoubled her caresses; and
Luigi, keeping his dark forebodings in the depths of his soul, expressed
to his Ginevra the tenderest love. They sought compensation in exalting their
feelings; their words, joys, and caresses became suffused with a kind of frenzy. They
feared the future. What feeling can be compared in strength with that of
a passion which may cease on the morrow, killed by death or want?
When they spoke of poverty each felt the necessity
of deceiving the other, and they fastened with mutual ardor on the
slightest hope.

One night Ginevra woke and missed Luigi from her side. She rose in
terror. A faint light shining on the opposite wall of the little
court-yard revealed that her husband was working in his study at
night. Luigi was now in the habit of waiting till his wife was asleep,
and then going up to his garret to write. Four o’clock struck. Ginevra
lay down again, and pretended to sleep. Presently Luigi returned,
overcome with fatigue and drowsiness. Ginevra looked sadly on the
beautiful, worn face, where toil and care were already drawing lines of
wrinkles.

“It is for me he spends his nights in writing,” she said to herself,
weeping.

A thought dried her tears. She would imitate Luigi. That day she
went to a print-shop, and, by a letter of recommendation she had
obtained from Elie Magus, one of her picture-dealers, she obtained an
order for the coloring of lithographs. During the day she painted her
pictures and attended to household cares; then, at night, she colored the engravings. This loving couple entered their
nuptial bed only to deceive each other; both feigned sleep, and left
it,—Luigi, as soon as he thought his wife was sleeping, Ginevra as soon
as he had gone.

One night Luigi, burning with a kind of fever induced
by toil under which his strength was giving way, opened the casement
of his garret to breathe the morning air and shake off, for a moment, the
burden of his care. Happening to glance downward, he saw the reflection
of Ginevra’s lamp on the opposite wall, and guessed the truth. He went down,
stepping softly, and surprised his wife in her studio, coloring engravings.

“Oh, Ginevra!” he cried.

She rose convulsively and blushed.

“Could I sleep while you were wearing yourself out with toil?” she said.

“But to me alone belongs the right to work in this way,” he answered.

“Could I be idle,” she asked, her eyes filling with tears, “when I know
that every mouthful we eat costs a drop of your blood? I should die if
I could not add my efforts to yours. All should be in common between us:
pains and pleasures, both.”

“She is cold!” cried Luigi, in despair. “Wrap your shawl closer round
you, my own Ginevra; the night is damp and chilly.”

They went to the window, the young wife leaning on the breast of her
beloved, who held her round the waist, and, together, in deep silence,
they gazed upward at the sky, which the dawn was slowly brightening.
Clouds of a grayish hue were moving rapidly; the East was growing
luminous.

“See!” said Ginevra. “It is an omen. We shall be happy.”

“Yes, in heaven,” replied Luigi, with a bitter smile. “Oh, Ginevra! you
who deserved all the treasures upon earth—”

“I have your heart,” she said, in tones of joy.

“Ah! I complain no more!” he answered, straining her tightly to him, and
covering with kisses the delicate face, which was losing the freshness
of youth, though its expression was still so soft, so tender that he
could not look at it without being comforted.

“What silence!” said Ginevra. “Dear friend, I take great
pleasure in sitting up. The majesty of Night is so contagious, it awes,
it inspires. There is I know not what great power in the thought: all
sleep, I wake.”

“Oh, my Ginevra,” he cried, “it is not to-night alone I feel how
delicately moulded is your soul. But see, the dawn is shining,—come and
sleep.”

“Yes,” replied Ginevra, “if I do not sleep alone. I suffered too much
that night I first discovered that you were waking while I slept.”

The courage with which these two young people fought with misery
received for a while its due reward; but an event which usually crowns
the happiness of a household proved fatal. Ginevra had a son,
who was, to use the popular expression, “as beautiful as the day.”
 The sense of motherhood doubled the strength of the young wife. Luigi
borrowed money to meet the expenses of Ginevra’s confinement. At first
she did not feel the fresh burden of their situation; and the pair gave
themselves wholly up to the joy of possessing a child. It was their last
happiness.

Like two swimmers uniting their efforts to breast a current, these two
Corsican souls struggled courageously; but sometimes they gave way to
an apathy which resembled the sleep that precedes death. Soon they were
obliged to sell their jewels. Poverty appeared to them suddenly,—not
hideous, but plainly clothed, almost easy to endure; its voice had
nothing terrifying; with it came neither spectres nor despair nor
rags; but it made them lose the memory and the habits of comfort; it
dried the springs of pride. Then, before they knew it, came want,—want
in all its horror, indifferent to its rags, treading underfoot all human
sentiments.

Seven or eight months after the birth of little Bartolomeo, it would
have been hard to see in the mother who suckled her sickly babe the
original of the beautiful portrait, the sole remaining ornament of the
squalid home. Without fire through a hard winter, the graceful outlines
of Ginevra’s figure were slowly destroyed; her cheeks grew white as
porcelain, and her eyes dulled as though the springs of life were drying
up. Watching her shrunken, discolored child, she felt no
suffering but for that young misery; and Luigi had no courage to smile
upon his son.

“I have wandered over Paris,” he said, one day. “I know no one; can I
ask help of strangers? Vergniaud, my old sergeant, is concerned in a
conspiracy, and they have put him in prison; besides, he has already
lent me all he could spare. As for our landlord, it is over a year since
he asked me for any rent.”

“But we are not in want,” replied Ginevra, gently, affecting calmness.

“Every hour brings some new difficulty,” continued Luigi, in a tone of
terror.

Another day Luigi took Ginevra’s pictures, her portrait, and the few
articles of furniture they could spare, and sold them for a miserable sum, which prolonged the agony of the household for a time. During these days of wretchedness Ginevra showed
the sublimity of her nature and the extent of her resignation.

Stoically she bore the strokes of misery; her strong soul held her up
against all woes; she worked with unfaltering hand beside her dying son,
performed her household duties with marvellous activity, and sufficed
for all. She was even happy, still, when she saw on Luigi’s lips a smile
of surprise at the cleanliness she produced in the one poor room where
they had taken refuge.

“Dear, I kept this bit of bread for you,” she said, one evening, when he
returned, worn-out.

“And you?”

“I? I have dined, dear Luigi; I want nothing more.”

And the tender look on her beseeching face urged him more than her words
to take the food of which she had deprived herself.

Luigi kissed her, with one of those kisses of despair that were given
in 1793 between friends as they mounted the scaffold. In such supreme
moments two beings see each other, heart to heart. The hapless Luigi,
comprehending suddenly that his wife was starving, was seized with the
fever which consumed her. He shuddered, and went out, pretending that
some business called him; for he would rather have drunk the deadliest
poison than escape death by eating that last morsel of bread left in his home.

He wandered wildly about Paris; amid the gorgeous equipages, in the
bosom of that flaunting luxury that displays itself everywhere;
he hurried past the windows of the money-changers where gold was
glittering; and at last he resolved to sell himself to be a substitute
for military service, hoping that this sacrifice would save Ginevra, and
that her father, during his absence, would take her home.

He went to one of those agents who manage these transactions, and felt a
sort of happiness in recognizing an old officer of the Imperial guard.

“It is two days since I have eaten anything,” he said to him in a slow,
weak voice. “My wife is dying of hunger, and has never uttered one word
of complaint; she will die smiling, I think. For God’s sake, comrade,”
 he added, bitterly, “buy me in advance; I am robust; I am no longer in
the service, and I—”

The officer gave Luigi a sum on account of what he promised to
procure for him. The wretched man laughed convulsively as he grasped the
gold, and ran with all his might, breathless, to his home, crying at
times:—

“Ginevra! Oh, my Ginevra!”

It was almost night when he reached his wretched room. He entered very
softly, fearing to cause too strong an emotion to his wife, whom he
had left so weak. The last rays of the sun, entering through the garret
window, were fading from Ginevra’s face as she sat sleeping in her
chair, and holding her child upon her breast.

“Wake, my dear one,” he said, not observing the infant, which shone, at
that moment, with supernatural light.

Hearing that voice, the poor mother opened her eyes, met Luigi’s
look, and smiled; but Luigi himself gave a cry of horror; he scarcely
recognized his wife, now half mad. With a gesture of savage energy he
showed her the gold. Ginevra began to laugh mechanically; but suddenly
she cried, in a dreadful voice:—

“The child, Luigi, he is cold!”

She looked at her son and swooned. The little Bartolomeo was dead. Luigi
took his wife in his arms, without removing the child, which she clasped
with inconceivable force; and after laying her on the bed he went out to
seek help.

“Oh! my God!” he said, as he met his landlord on the stairs. “I have
gold, gold, and my child has died of hunger, and his mother is dying,
too! Help me!”

He returned like one distraught to his wife, leaving the worthy mason,
and also the neighbors who heard him to gather a few things for the
needs of so terrible a want, hitherto unknown, for the two Corsicans had
carefully hidden it from a feeling of pride.

Luigi had cast his gold upon the floor and was kneeling by the bed on
which lay his wife.

“Father! take care of my son, who bears your name,” she was saying in
her delirium.

“Oh, my angel! be calm,” said Luigi, kissing her; “our good days are
coming back to us.”

“My Luigi,” she said, looking at him with extraordinary attention,
“listen to me. I feel that I am dying. My death is natural; I suffered
too much; besides, a happiness so great as mine has to be paid for.
Yes, my Luigi, be comforted. I have been so happy that if I were to live
again I would again accept our fate. I am a bad mother; I regret you
more than I regret my child—My child!” she added, in a hollow voice.

Two tears escaped her dying eyes, and suddenly she pressed the little
body she had no power to warm.

“Give my hair to my father, in memory of his Ginevra,” she said. “Tell
him I have never blamed him.”

Her head fell upon her husband’s arm.

“No, you cannot die!” cried Luigi. “The doctor is coming. We have
food. Your father will take you home. Prosperity is here. Stay with us,
angel!”

But the faithful heart, so full of love, was growing cold. Ginevra
turned her eyes instinctively to him she loved, though she was conscious
of nought else. Confused images passed before her mind, now losing
memory of earth. She knew that Luigi was there, for she clasped his
icy hand tightly, and more tightly still, as though she strove to save
herself from some precipice down which she feared to fall.

“Dear,” she said, at last, “you are cold; I will warm you.”

She tried to put his hand upon her heart, but died.

Two doctors, a priest, and several neighbors came into the room,
bringing all that was necessary to save the poor couple and calm their
despair. These strangers made some noise in entering; but after they had
entered, an awful silence filled the room.

While that scene was taking place, Bartolomeo and his wife sat
in their antique chairs, each at a corner of the vast fireplace, where a
glowing fire scarcely warmed the great spaces of their salon. The clock
told midnight.

For some time the old couple had lost the ability to sleep. At the
present moment they sat silent, like two persons in their dotage,
gazing about them at things they did not see. Their deserted salon, so
filled with memories, was feebly lighted by a single lamp which
seemed expiring. Without the spark upon the hearth,
they might soon have been in total darkness.

A friend had just left them; and the chair on which he had been sitting,
remained where he left it, between the two Corsicans. Piombo cast
glances at that chair,—glances full of thoughts, crowding one upon
another like remorse,—for the empty chair was Ginevra’s. Elisa Piombo
watched the expressions that now began to cross her husband’s pallid
face. Though long accustomed to divine his feelings from his changeful
agitations, they seemed tonight so threatening, and anon so melancholy that she felt she could no longer read a soul now
incomprehensible even to her.

Would Bartolomeo yield at last to the memories awakened by that chair?
Had he been shocked to see a stranger occuping it, used for the
first time since his daughter left him? Had the hour of his mercy
struck,—that hour she had vainly prayed and waited for till now?

These reflections shook the mother’s heart. For an instant
her husband’s countenance became so terrible that she trembled at having
used this simple means to bring about a mention of Ginevra’s name. The
night was wintry; the north wind drove snowflakes so sharply
against the blinds that the old couple fancied they heard a gentle
rustling. Ginevra’s mother dropped her head to hide her tears. Suddenly
a sigh burst from the old man’s breast; his wife looked at him; he
seemed crushed. Then she risked speaking—for the second time in
three years—of his daughter.

“Ginevra may be cold,” she said, softly.

Piombo quivered.

“She may be hungry,” she continued.

The old man dropped a tear.

“Perhaps she has a child and cannot suckle it; her milk is dried up!”
said the mother, in accents of despair.

“Let her come! let her come to me!” cried Piombo. “Oh! my precious
child, thou hast conquered me.”

The mother rose as if to fetch her daughter. At that instant the door
opened noisily, and a man, whose face no longer bore the semblance of
humanity, stood suddenly before them.

“Dead! Our two families were doomed to exterminate each other. Here is
all that remains of her,” he said, laying Ginevra’s long black hair upon
the table.

The old people shook and quivered as if a stroke of lightning had
blasted them.

Luigi no longer stood before them.

“He has spared me a shot, for he is dead,” said Bartolomeo, slowly,
gazing on the ground at his feet.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Bidault (known as Gigonnet)
       The Government Clerks
       Gobseck
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Daughter of Eve

     Bonaparte, Napoleon
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Colonel Chabert
       Domestic Peace
       The Seamy Side of History
       A Woman of Thirty

     Bonaparte, Lucien
       The Gondreville Mystery

     Camusot de Marville, Madame
       Cesar Birotteau
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Cousin Pons

     Magus, Elie
       A Marriage Settlement
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Pierre Grassou
       Cousin Pons

     Murat, Joachim, Prince
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Colonel Chabert
       Domestic Peace
       The Country Doctor

     Rapp
       The Gondreville Mystery

     Roguin
       Cesar Birotteau
       Eugenie Grandet
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Pierrette

     Thirion
       Cesar Birotteau
       Jealousies of a Country Town

     Tiphaine, Madame
       Pierrette

     Vergniaud, Louis
       Colonel Chabert
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################