At Paris there are almost always two separate parties at every ball and rout. First, an official party, made up of the persons invited — a fashionable but bored circle. Each grimaces for his neighbor’s eye; most of the younger women are there for one person only; when each woman has assured herself that for that one she is the handsomest woman in the room, and that the opinion is perhaps shared by a few others, a few trivial phrases are exchanged: “Do you think of going away soon to La Crampade?” “How well Madame de Portenduère sang!” “Who is that little woman with such a load of diamonds?” Or, after firing off some smart epigrams that give transient pleasure and leave wounds that rankle, the groups thin out, the mere lookers-on go, and the wax-lights burn down to the sconces.

The mistress of the house then waylays a few artists, amusing people, or intimate friends, saying, “Do not go yet; we will have a snug little supper.” These collect in some small room. The real party now begins: one in which every one can hear what is said, conversation is general, each is bound to be witty and to contribute to the amusement of all. Honest laughter replaces the gloom which company casts over the prettiest faces. In short, where the rout ends pleasure begins.

The rout — a cold display of luxury, a review of self-conceit in full dress — is one of those English inventions that tend to mechanize other nations. England seems bent on seeing the whole world as dull as itself, and dull in the same way. So this second supper-party is, in some houses, a happy protest of the old spirit of the French people. Only, unfortunately, so few houses protest; and the reason is simple. We no longer have many men placed, established, and successful as in former times; since the July Revolution of 1830, everybody is on the march, seeking Fortune. Time has become the costliest commodity, so no one can afford the extravagance of going home and getting up late. Hence there is no second soirée now but at the houses of women rich enough to entertain, and since July 1830 such women are rare in Paris.

In spite of the covert opposition of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, two or three women, among them Madame d’Espard and Mademoiselle des Touches, have not given up the influence they exercised in Paris and have not closed their houses.

Mademoiselle des Touches’ salon is noted as the last refuge of the old French wit, with its reserved depths, myriad subtle byways, and exquisite politeness. There you still find grace of manner notwithstanding conventional courtesy, perfect freedom of talk despite the reserve natural to breeding, and, above all, a liberal flow of ideas. No one there thinks of keeping his thought for a play; no one regards a story as material for a book. The hideous skeleton of literature at bay never stalks there, prowl­ing for a clever sally or an interesting subject.

I remember one of these evenings not so much for a confidence in which the illustrious de Marsay opened one of the deepest recesses of a woman’s heart, as for the reflections his narrative provoked about the change in the French woman since that fateful July revolution.

On that evening chance had brought together several persons whose undisputed merits had won European reputations. This is no flattery to France; there were many foreigners present. The men who most shone were not necessarily the most famous. Ingenious repartee, acute remarks, admirable banter, pictures sketched with brilliant precision, all sparkled and flowed without elaboration, poured out without disdain or effort, and were exquisitely expressed and delicately appreciated. The men of the world especially displayed genuine artistic grace and spirit.

Elsewhere in Europe you find elegant manners, cordiality, genial fellowship, and knowledge; but only in Paris, in this drawing-room, and those like it, does a particular wit abound that gives unity to all these social qualities — an indescribable flow which lets ideas, anecdotes, and incidents meander with ease. Paris alone possesses the science that makes conversation a tourney: each type of wit condensed into a shaft, each speaker casting his experience in a phrase, every one finding amusement, relaxation, and exercise. Here you exchange ideas without fear of being misunderstood.

Secrets are neatly betrayed; talk, light or deep, plays and eddies, changing with every phrase. Eager criticism and crisp anecdotes lead from one to the next. All eyes listen; a gesture asks a question, an expressive look answers. In short: everything is wit and mind.

The power of speech, handled well, is the power of the actor and the storyteller; on that evening it had never so completely bewitched me. Nor was I alone — we all spent a delightful evening. Conversation drifted into anecdote and brought out confessions, portraits, and follies that make this improvisation impossible to reproduce in full; yet by setting these things down in their natural freshness and abruptness you may feel the charm of a real French evening, at the moment when the most engaging familiarity makes each forget his personal conceit.

At about two in the morning, as supper ended, only intimate friends and those of great taste and breeding remained. By tacit agreement, at supper everyone renounced pretensions to importance. Perfect equality set the tone, though each present was proud of being himself.

Mademoiselle des Touches always insists her guests remain at table till they leave, having often noted the change a move produces in the spirit of a party. Between dining-room and drawing-room the charm is destroyed. If Sterne is right in saying an author’s ideas after shaving differ from those before, may we not assert that the frame of mind at table differs from that in the drawing-room? The atmosphere is not heady; the eye no longer contemplates the brilliant disorder of the dessert; lost are the happy effects of that laxness of mood and benevolence peculiar to the well-filled man, settled comfortably on modern springy chairs. In that mood everyone is ready to talk and to listen. Digestion, which is almost always active, makes every one find an opportunity.

This preamble is needed to set the scene for the narrative by which a celebrated man, now dead, depicted the innocent Jesuitry of women with the subtlety of one who has seen much of the world — the kind of storyteller that politicians like Talleyrand and Metternich can be.

De Marsay, prime minister for about six months, had already shown superior capabilities. Those who had known him were not surprised to see his talents and aptitudes as a statesman; still, it might be asked whether he would prove a solid politician or had merely been tempered by circumstance. This question had been asked by Émile Blondet, a man of wit and observation, who had long been a journalist and admired de Marsay without much acerbity.

“Was there ever,” said Blondet, “in your former life any event, thought, or wish that told you what your vocation was? For we all, like Newton, have our apple that falls and leads us to where our faculties develop—”

“Yes,” said de Marsay; “I will tell you about it.”

Pretty women, political dandies, artists, old men, de Marsay’s intimate friends — all settled to look at the Minister. The servants had left, the doors were shut, the curtains drawn. The silence was so complete that the coachmen’s murmurs in the courtyard and the pawing of horses could be heard.

“The statesman, my friends,” said the Minister, playing with his dessert-knife, “exists by one quality: the power of always being master of himself; of profiting by every event, however fortuitous; in short, of having within him a cold and disinterested other self, a spectator who notes our passions and whispers the judgment of a moral ready-reckoner.”

“That explains why a statesman is so rare in France,” said old Lord Dudley.

“From a sentimental point of view, this is horrible,” the Minister went on. “Hence when such a thing is seen in a young man — Richelieu, who, warned overnight by a letter of Concini’s peril, slept till midday when his benefactor was killed at ten; or Pitt; or Napoleon — he is a monster. I became such a monster at a very early age, thanks to a woman.”

“I fancied,” said Madame de Montcornet with a smile, “that more politicians were undone by us than we could make.”

“The monster of which I speak is a monster just because he withstands you,” replied de Marsay with an ironical bow.

“If this is a love-story,” the Baronne de Nucingen interposed, “I request it may not be interrupted by reflections.”

“Reflection is so antipathetic to it!” cried Joseph Bridau.

“I was seventeen,” de Marsay resumed; “the Restoration was consolidating. I was impetuous and fervid, in love for the first time, and, I may say now, one of the handsomest young fellows in Paris. I had youth and good looks — advantages due to fortune, but cherished as conquests. Like all youths, I loved a woman six years my senior. No one here can suspect or recognize her name. Ronquerolles alone once guessed my secret. He kept it well, but I would have feared his smile. However, he is gone,” said the Minister, looking round.

“For six months,” de Marsay went on, “possessed by my passion but unaware it had mastered me, I abandoned myself to that rapturous idolatry that is both triumph and frail joy of youth. I treasured her old gloves; I drank the infusion of her flowers; I rose at night to gaze at her window. All my blood rushed to my heart at her scent. I was miles from knowing that woman is a stove with a marble casing.”

“Oh! spare us your terrible verdicts,” cried Madame de Montcornet, smiling.

“I believe I should have crushed with my scorn the philosopher who first uttered this terrible but profoundly true thought,” said de Marsay. “These few words will remind you of your own follies.

“She was a great lady, a widow without children — all perfect. She would shut herself up to mark my linen with her hair; she returned my madness with her own. And how can we fail to believe in passion when it has the guarantee of madness?

“We each devoted ourselves to concealing a love so perfect from the world; and we succeeded. I will say nothing of her. She was perfection then and still considered one of the most beautiful women in Paris; at that time a man would have endured death to win one of her glances. She had a fortune fitting one who had been loved and adored, but the Restoration made it seem inadequate beside her name. In my fatuity I never dreamed of suspicion. Though my jealousy could have been of a hundred and twenty Othello-power, that passion slumbered in me like gold in a nugget. I would have ordered my servant to thrash me if I had doubted that angel — so fragile and strong, so fair, so artless, pure and spotless, whose blue eyes invited my gaze to the very depths of her heart with admirable submissiveness. There was never the slightest hesitation in her look or word; always white and fresh, ready for the beloved like the Oriental lily of the Song of Songs! Ah, my friends!” cried the Minister, grown young again, “one must hit one’s head on marble to dispel that poem!”

This outcry found an echo in the listeners and spurred their curiosity.

“Every morning, riding Sultan — the fine horse you sent me from England,” he said to Lord Dudley, “I rode past her open carriage, the pace reduced to a walk, and read the order of the day signaled by the flowers in her bouquet in case we could not exchange words. Though we saw each other almost nightly in society and she wrote daily, to deceive the curious we adopted a conduct of avoidance: never to look at each other; to avoid meeting; to speak ill of each other. Self-admiration, swagger, or playing the disdainful swain are nothing compared with feigned indifference to the true idol. If two lovers play that game, the world will be deceived — but they must be very secure of each other.

“Her stalking-horse was a man in high favor, a courtier, cold and sanctimonious, whom she never received at her house. This comedy was for simpletons and drawing-room circles. Marriage was never discussed between us; six years’ difference might give her pause; she knew nothing of my fortune, which I keep secret by principle. I, fascinated by her wit, manners, and knowledge, would have married her without thought. Her reserve charmed me. If she had been the first to speak of marriage in a certain tone, I might have noted it as vulgar in such an accomplished soul.

“Six months, full and perfect — a diamond of the purest water! That was my portion of love in this base world.

“One morning, attacked by that stiffness that marks the beginning of a cold, I wrote her a line to postpone one of those secret festivals buried under Paris roofs like pearls in the sea. No sooner sent than remorse seized me: she will not believe I am ill, I thought. She was used to affect jealousy and suspicion. When jealousy is genuine,” said de Marsay, interrupting himself, “it is the visible sign of unique passion.”

“Why?” asked the Princesse de Cadignan eagerly.

“Unique and true love,” he answered, “produces a kind of corporeal apathy, a contemplation in which the mind complicates everything; it works upon itself, turns fancies into torment — such jealousy is as delightful as distressing.”

A foreign minister smiled, feeling the truth of the remark.

“Besides,” de Marsay continued, “why miss a happy hour? Was it not better to go, though feverish? And if she learned I was ill she might come and compromise herself. I made an effort; I wrote a second letter and carried it myself, for my confidential servant had gone. The river lay between us. I crossed Paris; within sight of her door I sent a messenger with the note and, to be sure, drove past in a hackney cab to see if she might receive the two letters together. At two o’clock the great gate opened to admit a carriage. Whose? — that of the stalking-horse!

“Fifteen years since — even while I tell it — I still feel that surge in my heart. At the end of an hour I passed again; the carriage was still in the courtyard! My note no doubt sat with the porter. At half-past three the carriage drove out. I observed my rival; he was grave and did not smile; but he was in love, and there was business in hand.

“I went to our appointment; the queen of my heart met me; I saw her calm, pure, serene. I must confess I have always thought Othello not only stupid but of bad taste. Only a man half a Negro, perhaps, could behave as he did: the sight of the woman we love is balm that dispels anguish and doubt. All my rage vanished. My ailing condition was evident; horrible doubts that had fermented in me increased it. At last I found an opening: ‘You had no one with you this morning?’ I asked, making a pretext of my uneasiness about my first note.—‘Ah!’ she cried, ‘only a man could have such ideas! As if I could think of anything but your suffering. Till your second note I thought only how to see you.’—‘And you were alone?’—‘Alone,’ she said, looking at me with a face of innocence so perfect it must have driven the Moor to madness. As she lived alone in the house, the word was a fearful lie. One single lie destroys the absolute confidence which to some souls is the foundation of happiness.

“To explain what passed in me, assume we have an internal self of which the exterior I is a husk; that this self, as brilliant as light, is as fragile as a shade — well, that beautiful self was thenceforth forever shrouded in crape. I felt a cold and fleshless hand cast over me the winding-sheet of experience, dooming me to the eternal mourning of first betrayal. As I cast my eyes down that she might not observe my dizziness, a proud thought restored me somewhat: ‘If she is deceiving you, she is unworthy of you!’

“I ascribed my reddening and the tears to pain; the sweet creature insisted on driving me home with the blinds drawn. On the way she was full of solicitude and tenderness that might have deceived the Moor of Venice. If that great child hesitated two seconds more, every intelligent spectator feels he would ask Desdemona’s forgiveness. Thus killing the woman is the act of a boy. She wept as we parted, distressed at being unable to nurse me herself. She wished she were my valet, in whose happiness she found envy — all elegantly expressed, as Clarissa might have written in her joy. There is always a precious ape in the prettiest and most angelic woman!”

At these words all the women looked down, as if stung by a brutal truth so brutally stated.

“I will say nothing of the night nor of the week I spent,” de Marsay went on. “I discovered that I was a statesman.”

It was so well said that we all uttered an admiring exclamation.

“As I thought over the really cruel vengeance to be taken on a woman,” he continued, “with infernal ingenuity — for as we had loved each other some terrible and irreparable revenges were possible — I despised myself. I felt how common I was and insensibly formulated a horrible code — that of Indulgence. In taking vengeance on a woman do we not admit there is but one for us, that we cannot do without her? And then, is revenge the way to win her back? If she is not indispensable, if there are other women, why not grant her the right to change which we assume?

“This, of course, applies only to passion; in any other sense it would be socially wrong. Nothing more clearly proves the necessity for indissoluble marriage than the instability of passion. The two sexes must be chained, like wild beasts as they are, by inevitable law, deaf and mute. Eliminate revenge, and infidelity in love is nothing. Those who believe there is but one woman for them must favor vengeance, and then there is but one form of it — Othello’s.

“Mine was different.”

The words produced in us the imperceptible movement which newspaper writers mark as a great sensation.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“Cured of my cold, and of my pure, absolute, divine love, I flung myself
into an adventure, of which the heroine was charming, and of a style of
beauty utterly opposed to that of my deceiving angel. I took care not to
quarrel with this clever woman, who was so good an actress, for I doubt
whether true love can give such gracious delights as those lavished by
such a dexterous fraud. Such refined hypocrisy is as good as virtue.—I
am not speaking to you Englishwomen, my lady,” said the Minister,
suavely, addressing Lady Barimore, Lord Dudley’s daughter. “I tried to
be the same lover.

“I wished to have some of my hair worked up for my new angel, and I went
to a skilled artist who at that time dwelt in the Rue Boucher. The man
had a monopoly of capillary keepsakes, and I mention his address for the
benefit of those who have not much hair; he has plenty of every kind and
every color. After I had explained my order, he showed me his work. I
then saw feats of patience beyond what fairy tales credit. He brought me
up to date as to caprices and fashions in hair. ‘For the last year,’ said
he, ‘there has been a rage for marking linen with hair; happily I had a
fine collection of hair and skilled needlewomen,’—on hearing this a
suspicion flashed upon me; I took out my handkerchief and said, ‘So this
was done in your shop, with false hair?’—He looked at the handkerchief,
and said, ‘Ay! that lady was very particular, she insisted on verifying
the tint of the hair. My wife herself marked those handkerchiefs. You
have there, sir, one of the finest pieces of work we have ever executed.’
Before this last ray of light I might have believed something—might have
taken a woman’s word. I left the shop still having faith in pleasure,
but where love was concerned I was as atheistical as a mathematician.

“Two months later I was sitting by the side of the ethereal being in
her boudoir, on her sofa; I was holding one of her hands—they were very
beautiful—and we scaled the Alps of sentiment, culling their sweetest
flowers, and pulling off the daisy-petals; there is always a moment when
one pulls daisies to pieces, even if it is in a drawing-room and there
are no daisies. At the intensest moment of tenderness, and when we are
most in love, love is so aware of its own short duration that we are
irresistibly urged to ask, ‘Do you love me? Will you love me always?’ I
seized the elegiac moment, so warm, so flowery, so full-blown, to lead her
to tell her most delightful lies, in the enchanting language of love.
Charlotte displayed her choicest allurements: She could not live without
me; I was to her the only man in the world; she feared to weary me,
because my presence bereft her of all her wits; with me, all her faculties
were lost in love; she was indeed too tender to escape alarms; for the
last six months she had been seeking some way to bind me to her
eternally, and God alone knew that secret; in short, I was her god!”

The women who heard de Marsay seemed offended by seeing themselves so
well acted, for he seconded the words by airs, sidelong attitudes,
and mincing grimaces which were quite illusory.

“At the very moment when I might have believed these adorable
falsehoods, as I still held her right hand in mine, I said to her, ‘When
are you to marry the Duke?’

“The thrust was so direct, my gaze met hers so boldly, and her hand
lay so tightly in mine, that her start, slight as it was, could not
be disguised; her eyes fell before mine, and a faint blush colored
her cheeks.—‘The Duke! What do you mean?’ she said, affecting great
astonishment.—‘I know everything,’ replied I; ‘and in my opinion, you
should delay no longer; he is rich; he is a duke, but he is more than
devout, he is religious! I am sure, therefore, that you have been
faithful to me, thanks to his scruples. You cannot imagine how urgently
necessary it is that you should compromise him with himself and with
God; short of that you will never bring him to the point.’—‘Is this
a dream?’ said she, pushing her hair from her forehead, fifteen
years before Malibran, with the gesture which Malibran has made so
famous.—‘Come, do not be childish, my angel,’ said I, trying to take
her hands; but she folded them before her with a little prudish and
indignant mien.—‘Marry him, you have my permission,’ said I, replying
to this gesture by using the formal vous instead of tu. ‘Nay, better, I
beg you to do so.’—‘But,’ cried she, falling at my knees, ‘there is some
horrible mistake; I love no one in the world but you; you may demand
any proofs you please.’—‘Rise, my dear,’ said I, ‘and do me the honor of
being truthful.’—‘As before God.’—‘Do you doubt my love?’—‘No.’—‘Nor my
fidelity?’—‘No.’—‘Well, I have committed the greatest crime,’ I went on.
‘I have doubted your love and your fidelity. Between two intoxications
I looked calmly about me.’—‘Calmly!’ sighed she. ‘That is enough, Henri;
you no longer love me.’

“She had at once found, you perceive, a loophole for escape. In scenes
like these an adverb is dangerous. But, happily, curiosity made her
add: ‘And what did you see? Have I ever spoken of the Duke excepting in
public? Have you detected in my eyes——?’—‘No,’ said I, ‘but in his.
And you have eight times made me go to Saint-Thomas d’Aquin to see you
listening to the same mass as he.’—‘Ah!’ she exclaimed, ‘then I have
made you jealous!’—Oh! I only wish I could be!’ said I, admiring the
pliancy of her quick intelligence, and these acrobatic feats which can
only be successful in the eyes of the blind. ‘But by dint of going to
church I have become very incredulous. On the day of my first cold, and
your first treachery, when you thought I was in bed, you received the
Duke, and you told me you had seen no one.’—‘Do you know that your
conduct is infamous?’—‘In what respect? I consider your marriage to the
Duke an excellent arrangement; he gives you a great name, the only rank
that suits you, a brilliant and distinguished position. You will be one
of the queens of Paris. I should be doing you a wrong if I placed any
obstacle in the way of this prospect, this distinguished life, this
splendid alliance. Ah! Charlotte, some day you will do me justice by
discovering how unlike my character is to that of other young men. You
would have been compelled to deceive me; yes, you would have found it
very difficult to break with me, for he watches you. It is time that we
should part, for the Duke is rigidly virtuous. You must turn prude;
I advise you to do so. The Duke is vain; he will be proud of his
wife.’—‘Oh!’ cried she, bursting into tears, ‘Henri, if only you
had spoken! Yes, if you had chosen’—it was I who was to blame, you
understand—‘we would have gone to live all our days in a corner,
married, happy, and defied the world.’—‘Well, it is too late now,’ said
I, kissing her hands, and putting on a victimized air.—‘Good God! But I
can undo it all!’ said she.—‘No, you have gone too far with the Duke. I
ought indeed to go a journey to part us more effectually. We should both
have reason to fear our own affection——’—‘Henri, do you think the
Duke has any suspicions?’ I was still ‘Henri,’ but the tu was lost for
ever.—‘I do not think so,’ I replied, assuming the manner of a friend;
‘but be as devout as possible, reconcile yourself to God, for the Duke
waits for proofs; he hesitates, you must bring him to the point.’

“She rose, and walked twice round the boudoir in real or affected
agitation; then she no doubt found an attitude and a look beseeming the
new state of affairs, for she stopped in front of me, held out her hand,
and said in a voice broken by emotion, ‘Well, Henri, you are loyal,
noble, and a charming man; I shall never forget you.’

“These were admirable tactics. She was bewitching in this transition
of feeling, indispensable to the situation in which she wished to place
herself in regard to me. I fell into the attitude, the manners, and the
look of a man so deeply distressed, that I saw her too newly assumed
dignity giving way; she looked at me, took my hand, drew me along
almost, threw me on the sofa, but quite gently, and said after a
moment’s silence, ‘I am dreadfully unhappy, my dear fellow. Do you love
me?’—‘Oh! yes.’—‘Well, then, what will become of you?’”

At this point the women all looked at each other.

“Though I can still suffer when I recall her perfidy, I still laugh at
her expression of entire conviction and sweet satisfaction that I must
die, or at any rate sink into perpetual melancholy,” de Marsay went on.
“Oh! do not laugh yet!” he said to his listeners; “there is better to
come. I looked at her very tenderly after a pause, and said to her,
‘Yes, that is what I have been wondering.’—‘Well, what will you do?’—‘I
asked myself that the day after my cold.’—‘And——?’ she asked with eager
anxiety.—‘And I have made advances to the little lady to whom I was
supposed to be attached.’

“Charlotte started up from the sofa like a frightened doe, trembling
like a leaf, gave me one of those looks in which women forgo all their
dignity, all their modesty, their refinement, and even their grace, the
sparkling glitter of a hunted viper’s eye when driven into a corner, and
said, ‘And I have loved this man! I have struggled! I have——’ On this
last thought, which I leave you to guess, she made the most impressive
pause I ever heard.—‘Good God!’ she cried, ‘how unhappy are we women!
we never can be loved. To you there is nothing serious in the purest
feelings. But never mind; when you cheat us you still are our dupes!’—‘I
see that plainly,’ said I, with a stricken air; ‘you have far too much
wit in your anger for your heart to suffer from it.’—This modest epigram
increased her rage; she found some tears of vexation. ‘You disgust
me with the world and with life,’ she said; ‘you snatch away all my
illusions; you deprave my heart.’

“She said to me all that I had a right to say to her, and with a simple
effrontery, an artless audacity, which would certainly have nailed any
man but me on the spot.—‘What is to become of us poor women in a state
of society such as Louis XVIII.’s charter made it?’—(Imagine how her
words had run away with her.)—‘Yes, indeed, we are born to suffer. In
matters of passion we are always superior to you, and you are beneath
all loyalty. There is no honesty in your hearts. To you love is a game
in which you always cheat.’—‘My dear,’ said I, ‘to take anything
serious in society nowadays would be like making romantic love to an
actress.’—‘What a shameless betrayal! It was deliberately planned!’—‘No,
only a rational issue.’—‘Good-bye, Monsieur de Marsay,’ said she; ‘you
have deceived me horribly.’—‘Surely,’ I replied, taking up a
submissive attitude, ‘Madame la Duchesse will not remember Charlotte’s
grievances?’—‘Certainly,’ she answered bitterly.—‘Then, in fact, you
hate me?’—She bowed, and I said to myself, ‘There is something still
left!’

“The feeling she had when I parted from her allowed her to believe that
she still had something to avenge. Well, my friends, I have carefully
studied the lives of men who have had great success with women, but I
do not believe that the Maréchal de Richelieu, or Lauzun, or Louis de
Valois ever effected a more judicious retreat at the first attempt. As
to my mind and heart, they were cast in a mould then and there, once
for all, and the power of control I thus acquired over the thoughtless
impulses which make us commit so many follies gained me the admirable
presence of mind you all know.”

“How deeply I pity the second!” exclaimed the Baronne de Nucingen.

A scarcely perceptible smile on de Marsay’s pale lips made Delphine de
Nucingen color.

“How we do forget!” said the Baron de Nucingen.

The great banker’s simplicity was so extremely droll, that his wife, who
was de Marsay’s “second,” could not help laughing like every one else.

“You are all ready to condemn the woman,” said Lady Dudley. “Well,
I quite understand that she did not regard her marriage as an act
of inconstancy. Men will never distinguish between constancy and
fidelity.—I know the woman whose story Monsieur de Marsay has told us,
and she is one of the last of your truly great ladies.”

“Alas! my lady, you are right,” replied de Marsay. “For very nearly
fifty years we have been looking on at the progressive ruin of all
social distinctions. We ought to have saved our women from this great
wreck, but the Civil Code has swept its leveling influence over their
heads. However terrible the words, they must be spoken: Duchesses are
vanishing, and marquises too! As to the baronesses—I must apologize to
Madame de Nucingen, who will become a countess when her husband is made
a peer of France—baronesses have never succeeded in getting people to
take them seriously.”

“Aristocracy begins with the viscountess,” said Blondet with a smile.

“Countesses will survive,” said de Marsay. “An elegant woman will be
more or less of a countess—a countess of the Empire or of yesterday,
a countess of the old block, or, as they say in Italy, a countess by
courtesy. But as to the great lady, she died out with the dignified
splendor of the last century, with powder, patches, high-heeled
slippers, and stiff bodices with a delta stomacher of bows. Duchesses
in these days can pass through a door without any need to widen it for
their hoops. The Empire saw the last of gowns with trains! I am still
puzzled to understand how a sovereign who wished to see his drawing-room
swept by ducal satin and velvet did not make indestructible laws.
Napoleon never guessed the results of the Code he was so proud of.
That man, by creating duchesses, founded the race of our ‘ladies’ of
to-day—the indirect offspring of his legislation.”

“It was logic, handled as a hammer by boys just out of school and
by obscure journalists, which demolished the splendors of the social
state,” said the Comte de Vandenesse. “In these days every rogue who can
hold his head straight in his collar, cover his manly bosom with half an
ell of satin by way of a cuirass, display a brow where apocryphal genius
gleams under curling locks, and strut in a pair of patent-leather pumps
graced by silk socks which cost six francs, screws his eye-glass into
one of his eye-sockets by puckering up his cheek, and whether he be an
attorney’s clerk, a contractor’s son, or a banker’s bastard, he stares
impertinently at the prettiest duchess, appraises her as she walks
downstairs, and says to his friend—dressed by Buisson, as we all are,
and mounted in patent-leather like any duke himself—‘There, my boy, that
is a perfect lady.’”

“You have not known how to form a party,” said Lord Dudley; “it will
be a long time yet before you have a policy. You talk a great deal in
France about organizing labor, and you have not yet organized property.
So this is what happens: Any duke—and even in the time of Louis XVIII.
and Charles X. there were some left who had two hundred thousand francs
a year, a magnificent residence, and a sumptuous train of servants—well,
such a duke could live like a great lord. The last of these great
gentlemen in France was the Prince de Talleyrand.—This duke leaves four
children, two of them girls. Granting that he has great luck in marrying
them all well, each of these descendants will have but sixty or eighty
thousand francs a year now; each is the father or mother of children,
and consequently obliged to live with the strictest economy in a flat on
the ground floor or first floor of a large house. Who knows if they
may not even be hunting a fortune? Henceforth the eldest son’s wife, a
duchess in name only, has no carriage, no people, no opera-box, no time
to herself. She has not her own rooms in the family mansion, nor her
fortune, nor her pretty toys; she is buried in trade; she buys socks for
her dear little children, nurses them herself, and keeps an eye on
her girls, whom she no longer sends to school at a convent. Thus your
noblest dames have been turned into worthy brood-hens.”

“Alas! it is true,” said Joseph Bridau. “In our day we cannot show
those beautiful flowers of womanhood which graced the golden ages of the
French Monarchy. The great lady’s fan is broken. A woman has nothing now
to blush for; she need not slander or whisper, hide her face or reveal
it. A fan is of no use now but for fanning herself. When once a thing is
no more than what it is, it is too useful to be a form of luxury.”

“Everything in France has aided and abetted the ‘perfect lady,’” said
Daniel d’Arthez. “The aristocracy has acknowledged her by retreating
to the recesses of its landed estates, where it has hidden itself to
die—emigrating inland before the march of ideas, as of old to foreign
lands before that of the masses. The women who could have founded
European salons, could have guided opinion and turned it inside out
like a glove, could have ruled the world by ruling the men of art or
of intellect who ought to have ruled it, have committed the blunder of
abandoning their ground; they were ashamed of having to fight against
the citizen class drunk with power, and rushing out on to the stage of
the world, there to be cut to pieces perhaps by the barbarians who are
at its heels. Hence, where the middle class insist on seeing princesses,
these are really only ladylike young women. In these days princes can
find no great ladies whom they may compromise; they cannot even confer
honor on a woman taken up at random. The Duc de Bourbon was the last
prince to avail himself of this privilege.”

“And God alone knows how dearly he paid for it,” said Lord Dudley.

“Nowadays princes have lady-like wives, obliged to share their opera-box
with other ladies; royal favor could not raise them higher by a hair’s
breadth; they glide unremarkable between the waters of the citizen
class and those of the nobility—not altogether noble nor altogether
bourgeoises,” said the Marquise de Rochegude acridly.

“The press has fallen heir to the Woman,” exclaimed Rastignac. “She
no longer has the quality of a spoken feuilleton—delightful calumnies
graced by elegant language. We read feuilletons written in a dialect
which changes every three years, society papers about as mirthful as
an undertaker’s mute, and as light as the lead of their type. French
conversation is carried on from one end of the country to the other in
a revolutionary jargon, through long columns of type printed in old
mansions where a press groans in the place where formerly elegant
company used to meet.”

“The knell of the highest society is tolling,” said a Russian Prince.
“Do you hear it? And the first stroke is your modern word lady.”

“You are right, Prince,” said de Marsay. “The ‘perfect lady,’ issuing
from the ranks of the nobility, or sprouting from the citizen class, and
the product of every soil, even of the provinces is the expression of
these times, a last remaining embodiment of good taste, grace, wit,
and distinction, all combined, but dwarfed. We shall see no more great
ladies in France, but there will be ‘ladies’ for a long time, elected by
public opinion to form an upper chamber of women, and who will be among
the fair sex what a ‘gentleman’ is in England.”

“And that they call progress!” exclaimed Mademoiselle des Touches. “I
should like to know where the progress lies?”

“Why, in this,” said Madame de Nucingen. “Formerly a woman might have
the voice of a fish-seller, the walk of a grenadier, the face of an
impudent courtesan, her hair too high on her forehead, a large foot, a
thick hand—she was a great lady in spite of it all; but in these days,
even if she were a Montmorency—if a Montmorency would ever be such a
creature—she would not be a lady.”

“But what do you mean by a ‘perfect lady’?” asked Count Adam Laginski.

“She is a modern product, a deplorable triumph of the elective system
as applied to the fair sex,” said the Minister. “Every revolution has a
word of its own which epitomizes and depicts it.”

“You are right,” said the Russian, who had come to make a literary
reputation in Paris. “The explanation of certain words added from time
to time to your beautiful language would make a magnificent history.
Organize, for instance, is the word of the Empire, and sums up Napoleon
completely.”

“But all that does not explain what is meant by a lady!” the young Pole
exclaimed, with some impatience.

“Well, I will tell you,” said Émile Blondet to Count Adam. “One fine
morning you go for a saunter in Paris. It is past two, but five has not
yet struck. You see a woman coming towards you; your first glance at her
is like the preface to a good book, it leads you to expect a world
of elegance and refinement. Like a botanist over hill and dale in his
pursuit of plants, among the vulgarities of Paris life you have at
last found a rare flower. This woman is attended by two very
distinguished-looking men, of whom one, at any rate, wears an order; or
else a servant out of livery follows her at a distance of ten yards. She
displays no gaudy colors, no open-worked stockings, no over-elaborate
waist-buckle, no embroidered frills to her drawers fussing round her
ankles. You will see that she is shod with prunella shoes, with sandals
crossed over extremely fine cotton stockings, or plain gray silk
stockings; or perhaps she wears boots of the most exquisite simplicity.
You notice that her gown is made of a neat and inexpensive material, but
made in a way that surprises more than one woman of the middle class;
it is almost always a long pelisse, with bows to fasten it, and neatly
bound with fine cord or an imperceptible braid. The Unknown has a way of
her own in wrapping herself in her shawl or mantilla; she knows how to
draw it round her from her hips to her neck, outlining a carapace, as it
were, which would make an ordinary woman look clumsy, but which in her
sets off the most beautiful forms while concealing them. How does she
do it? This secret she keeps, though unguarded by any patent.

“As she walks she gives herself a little concentric and harmonious
twist, which makes her supple or dangerous slenderness writhe under the
stuff, as a snake does under the green gauze of trembling grass. Is it
to an angel or a devil that she owes the graceful undulation which plays
under her long black silk cape, stirs its lace frill, sheds an airy
balm, and what I should like to call the breeze of a Parisienne? You may
recognize over her arms, round her waist, about her throat, a science of
drapery recalling the antique Mnemosyne.

“Oh! how thoroughly she understands the cut of her gait—forgive the
expression. Study the way she puts her foot forward moulding her
skirt with such a decent preciseness that the passer-by is filled with
admiration, mingled with desire, but subdued by deep respect. When an
Englishwoman attempts this step, she looks like a grenadier marching
forward to attack a redoubt. The women of Paris have a genius for
walking. The municipality really owed them asphalt footwalks.

“Our Unknown jostles no one. If she wants to pass, she waits with
proud humility till some one makes way. The distinction peculiar to
a well-bred woman betrays itself, especially in the way she holds her
shawl or cloak crossed over her bosom. Even as she walks she has a
little air of serene dignity, like Raphael’s Madonnas in their frames.
Her aspect, at once quiet and disdainful, makes the most insolent dandy
step aside for her.

“Her bonnet, remarkable for its simplicity, is trimmed with crisp
ribbons; there may be flowers in it, but the cleverest of such women
wear only bows. Feathers demand a carriage; flowers are too showy.
Beneath it you see the fresh unworn face of a woman who, without
conceit, is sure of herself; who looks at nothing, and sees everything;
whose vanity, satiated by being constantly gratified, stamps her face
with an indifference which piques your curiosity. She knows that she is
looked at, she knows that everybody, even women, turn round to see her
again. And she threads her way through Paris like a gossamer, spotless
and pure.

“This delightful species affects the hottest latitudes, the cleanest
longitudes of Paris; you will meet her between the 10th and 110th Arcade
of the Rue de Rivoli; along the line of the Boulevards from the equator
of the Passage des Panoramas, where the products of India flourish,
where the warmest creations of industry are displayed, to the Cape of
the Madeleine; in the least muddy districts of the citizen quarters,
between No. 30 and No. 130 of the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré. During
the winter, she haunts the terrace of the Feuillants, but not the
asphalt pavement that lies parallel. According to the weather, she may
be seen flying in the Avenue of the Champs-Élysées. Never is this pretty
variety of woman to be seen in the hyperborean regions of the Rue Saint-Denis,
never in the Kamtschatka of miry, narrow, commercial streets, never anywhere in bad weather.
These flowers of Paris, blooming only in Oriental weather, perfume the
highways; and after five o’clock fold up like morning-glory flowers.
The women you will see later, looking a little like them, are would-be
ladies; while the fair Unknown, your Beatrice of a day, is a ‘perfect
lady.’

“It is not very easy for a foreigner, my dear Count, to recognize the
differences by which the observer emeritus distinguishes them—women
are such consummate actresses; but they are glaring in the eyes of
Parisians: hooks ill fastened, strings showing loops of rusty-white
tape through a gaping slit in the back, rubbed shoe-leather, ironed
bonnet-strings, an over-full skirt, an over-tight waist. You will see
a certain effort in the intentional droop of the eyelid. There is
something conventional in the attitude.

“As to the bourgeoise, the citizen womankind, she cannot possibly be
mistaken for the spell cast over you by the Unknown. She is bustling,
and goes out in all weathers, trots about, comes, goes, gazes, does not
know whether she will or will not go into a shop. Where the lady knows
just what she wants and what she is doing, the townswoman is undecided,
tucks up her skirts to cross a gutter, dragging a child by the hand,
which compels her to look out for the vehicles; she is a mother in
public, and talks to her daughter; she carries money in her bag, and has
open-work stockings on her feet; in winter, she wears a boa over her
fur cloak; in summer, a shawl and a scarf; she is accomplished in the
redundancies of dress.

“You will meet the fair Unknown again at the Italiens, at the Opéra,
at a ball. She will then appear under such a different aspect that you
would think them two beings devoid of any analogy. The woman has emerged
from those mysterious garments like a butterfly from its silky cocoon.
She serves up, like some rare dainty, to your lavished eyes, the forms
which her bodice scarcely revealed in the morning. At the theatre she
never mounts higher than the second tier, excepting at the Italiens.
You can there watch at your leisure the studied deliberateness of her
movements. The enchanting deceiver plays off all the little political
artifices of her sex so naturally as to exclude all idea of art
or premeditation. If she has a royally beautiful hand, the most
perspicacious beholder will believe that it is absolutely necessary that
she should twist, or refix, or push aside the ringlet or curl she plays
with. If she has some dignity of profile, you will be persuaded that she
is giving irony or grace to what she says to her neighbor, sitting in
such a position as to produce the magical effect of the ‘lost profile,'
so dear to great painters. If she has a pretty foot, she will throw herself on
a sofa with the coquettish grace of a cat in the sunshine, her feet
outstretched without your feeling that her attitude is anything but the
most charming model ever given to a sculptor by lassitude.

“Only the perfect lady is quite at her ease in full dress; nothing
inconveniences her. You will never see her, like the woman of the
citizen class, pulling up a refractory shoulder-strap, or pushing down a
rebellious whalebone, or looking whether her tucker is doing its office
of faithful guardian to two treasures of dazzling whiteness, or glancing
in the mirrors to see if her head-dress is keeping its place. Her toilet
is always in harmony with her character; she had had time to study
herself, to learn what becomes her, for she has long known what does not
suit her. You will not find her as you go out; she vanishes before the
end of the play. If by chance she is to be seen, calm and stately, on
the stairs, she is experiencing some violent emotion; she has to bestow
a glance, to receive a promise. Perhaps she goes down so slowly on
purpose to gratify the vanity of a slave whom she sometimes obeys. If
your meeting takes place at a ball or an evening party, you will gather
the honey, natural or affected of her insinuating voice; her empty
words will enchant you, and she will know how to give them the value of
thought by her inimitable bearing.”

“To be such a woman, is it not necessary to be very clever?” asked the
Polish Count.

“It is necessary to have great taste,” replied the Princesse de
Cadignan.

“And in France taste is more than cleverness,” said the Russian.

“This woman’s cleverness is the triumph of a purely plastic art,”
Blondet went on. “You will not know what she said, but you will be
fascinated. She will toss her head, or gently shrug her white shoulders;
she will gild an insignificant speech with a charming pout and smile; or
throw a Voltairean epigram into an ‘Indeed!’ an ‘Ah!’ a ‘What then!’
A jerk of her head will be her most pertinent form of questioning; she
will give meaning to the movement by which she twirls a vinaigrette
hanging to her finger by a ring. She gets an artificial grandeur out
of superlative trivialities; she simply drops her hand impressively,
letting it fall over the arm of her chair as dewdrops hang on the cup of
a flower, and all is said—she has pronounced judgment beyond appeal, to
the apprehension of the most obtuse. She knows how to listen to you;
she gives you the opportunity of shining, and—I ask your modesty—those
moments are rare?”

The candid simplicity of the young Pole, to whom Blondet spoke, made all
the party shout with laughter.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“Now, you will not talk for half-an-hour with a bourgeoise without her alluding to her husband in one way or another,” Blondet continued gravely; “whereas, even if you know your lady is married, she will conceal her husband so effectually that it would need the enterprise of Columbus to discover him. Often you will fail single-handed. If you have had no opportunity of inquiring, towards the end of the evening you see her fixedly watching a middle-aged man with a decoration, who bows and goes out. She has ordered her carriage and goes.

“You are not the rose, but you have been with the rose, and you go to bed beneath the golden canopy of a delicious dream, perhaps lasting after Sleep has opened the ivory gates of the temple of dreams.

“At home the lady sees no one before four; she is shrewd enough always to keep you waiting. In her house everything is in good taste; her luxury is for hourly use and renewed; you will see nothing under glass shades, no rags of wrappings like a pantry. The staircase will be warmed. Flowers everywhere will charm you—flowers, the only gift she accepts, and those only from certain people, for nosegays live but a day; they give pleasure and must be replaced; to her they are a symbol and a promise. The costly toys of fashion lie about, but not as in a museum. You will find her in a low chair by the fire, from which she will not rise to greet you. Her talk at home will differ from the ball-room; there she was our creditor; in her own home she owes you the pleasure of her wit. These are the shades of which the lady is a marvelous mistress. She likes in you a man to swell her circle, an object for the cares and attentions such women now bestow. To attract you she will be bewitchingly charming. This especially shows how isolated women are nowadays, and why they want a little world of their own, in which they may seem a constellation. Conversation is impossible without generalities.”

“Yes,” said de Marsay, “you have truly hit the fault of our age. The epigram—a volume in a word—no longer strikes at persons or things, but at squalid events, and it dies in a day.”

“Hence,” Blondet went on, “the lady’s intelligence, if she has any, consists in casting doubts on everything. Here is the great difference between two women: the townswoman is certainly virtuous; the lady does not yet know whether she is or will be; she hesitates where the other refuses point-blank and falls full length. This hesitancy is one of the last graces left to her by our horrible times. She rarely goes to church, but she will talk to you of religion; if you affect Free-thought, she will try to convert you, opening the way for the stereotyped phrases, head-shakings, and gestures all these women understand: ‘For shame! I thought you had too much sense to attack religion. Society is tottering, and you deprive it of its support. Why, religion at this moment means you and me; it is property, and the future of our children! Ah! let us not be selfish! Individualism is the disease of the age, and religion is the only remedy; it unites families which your laws put asunder,’ and so on. Then she plunges into some neo-Christian speech sprinkled with political notions that is neither Catholic nor Protestant—but moral? Oh! very moral!—a patchwork of modern doctrines at loggerheads.”

The women laughed at Blondet’s caricature.

“Dear Count Adam,” Blondet said to the Pole, “this will have shown you that the ‘perfect lady’ embodies the intellectual no less than the political muddle, surrounded by the showy, short-lived products of an industry always aiming to destroy its work to replace it. When you leave her you say to yourself: She certainly has superior ideas! And you believe it because she will have sounded your heart with a delicate touch and asked your secrets; she affects ignorance to learn everything; there are some things she never knows, not even when she knows them. You alone will be uneasy; you will know nothing of the state of her heart. The great ladies of old flaunted their affairs; today the lady has her little passion neatly ruled like a sheet of music with crotchets and quavers, rests and pauses. A mere weak woman, she is anxious not to compromise her love, her husband, or her children’s future. Name, position, and fortune no longer protect every kind of merchandise aboard. The whole aristocracy no longer advances united to screen the lady. She has not the lofty antagonism of the past; she can crush nothing; she would be crushed. Thus she is apt at Jesuitical mezzo termine, a creature of equivocal compromises, guarded proprieties, anonymous passions steered between two reef-bound shores. She is as much afraid of her servants as an Englishwoman who lives in dread of a divorce trial. So free at a ball, so attractive out walking, she is a slave at home; she is only independent in perfect privacy, or theoretically. Her task is to preserve herself in her position as a lady.

“In our day a woman repudiated by her husband, reduced to a meagre allowance, without carriage, luxury, or opera-box, is drifted; she becomes a chattel. The Carmelites will not receive a married woman; it would be bigamy. Would her lover still have anything to say to her? Thus your perfect lady may perhaps give occasion to calumny, never to slander.”

“It is all so horribly true,” said the Princesse de Cadignan.

“And so,” Blondet continued, “our ‘perfect lady’ lives between English hypocrisy and the frankness of the eighteenth century—a bastard system symptomatic of an age in which transition leads nowhere; everything is a matter of degree; all the great figures shrink into the background, and distinction is purely personal. I am sure that it is impossible for a woman, even born close to a throne, to acquire before five-and-twenty the encyclopedic knowledge of trifles, the practice of manoeuvring, the important small things, the musical tones and harmony of coloring, the angelic bedevilments and innocent cunning, the speech and the silence, the seriousness and the banter, the wit and the obtuseness, the diplomacy and the ignorance which make the perfect lady.”

“And where,” Mademoiselle des Touches asked Blondet, “would you class the female author? Is she a perfect lady, a woman comme il faut?”

“When she has no genius, she is a woman comme il n’en faut pas,” Blondet replied, glancing in a way that might seem praise to Camille Maupin. “This epigram is not mine, but Napoleon’s,” he added.

“You need not owe Napoleon any grudge on that score,” said Canalis with emphasis. “It was one of his weaknesses to be jealous of literary genius—for he had his mean points. Who will ever explain, depict, or understand Napoleon? A man represented with his arms folded, who did everything, the most concentrated, mordant, and acid of forces; a singular genius who carried armed civilization in every direction without fixing it anywhere; a man who could do everything because he willed everything; a prodigious phenomenon of will, conquering illness by battle, yet doomed to die of disease in bed after living amid balls and bullets; a man with a code and a sword in his brain, word and deed; a clear-sighted spirit that foresaw everything but his own fall; a capricious politician who risked men by handfuls out of economy, and yet spared three diplomats—Talleyrand, Pozzo de Borgo, and Metternich—whose deaths might have saved the Empire; a man to whom nature gave a heart in a frame of bronze; mirthful and kind at midnight amid women, and next morning manipulating Europe as a girl might splash in her bath! Hypocritical and generous; loving tawdriness and simplicity; devoid of taste yet protecting the arts; and in spite of these antitheses, really great in everything by instinct or temperament; Caesar at five-and-twenty, Cromwell at thirty; then, like my grocer buried in Père Lachaise, a good husband and a good father. In short, he improvised public works, empires, kings, codes, verses, a romance—and all with more range than precision. Did he not aim at making all Europe France? After changing the laws of gravitation, he left us poorer than when he began; he, who had taken an empire by his name, lost his name on its frontier in a sea of blood and soldiers. A man all thought and all action, who comprehended Desaix and Fouché.”

“All despotism and all justice at the right moments. The true king!” said de Marsay.

“Ah! vat a pleashre it is to dichest vile you talk,” said Baron de Nucingen.

“But do you suppose the treat we are giving you is a common one?” Joseph Bridau asked. “If you had to pay for the charms of conversation as for dancing or music, your fortune would be inadequate! There is no second performance of the same flash of wit.”

“And are we really so much deteriorated as these gentlemen think?” asked the Princesse de Cadignan, smiling sceptically and ironically to the women. “Because under a regime which makes everything small you prefer small dishes, small rooms, small pictures, small articles, small newspapers, small books, does that prove women have grown smaller? Why should the human heart change because you change your coat? In all ages the passions remain the same. I know cases of beautiful devotion and sublime sufferings which lack the publicity—the glory, if you choose—that once gave lustre to the errors of some women. But though one may not have saved a King of France, one is not the less an Agnès Sorel. Do you believe our Marquise d’Espard is not the peer of Madame Doublet or Madame du Deffant, in whose rooms much evil was spoken and done? Is not Taglioni a match for Camargo? Malibran the equal of Saint-Huberti? Are not our poets superior to those of the eighteenth century? If now, through the fault of the grocers who govern us, we have not a style of our own, had not the Empire its distinguishing stamp as the age of Louis XV. had, and was not its splendor fabulous? Have the sciences lost anything?”

“I am quite of your opinion, madame; the women of this age are truly great,” replied the Comte de Vandenesse. “When posterity follows us, will not Madame Récamier appear as fine as the most beautiful women of the past? We have made so much history that historians will be lacking. The age of Louis XIV. had but one Madame de Sévigné; we have a thousand in Paris who certainly write better than she did, and who do not publish their letters. Whether the Frenchwoman be called ‘perfect lady,’ or great lady, she will always be the woman among women.

“Émile Blondet has given us a picture of the fascinations of a woman of the day; but, if need be, this creature who bridles or shows off, who chirps out the ideas of Mr. This and Mr. That, can be heroic. Your faults, mesdames, are all the more poetical because they must always be surrounded by greater perils. I have seen much of the world, and where the illegality of your feelings might be excused, I have always observed the effects of some chance—which you may call Providence—inevitably overwhelming those we consider light women.”

“I hope,” Madame de Vandenesse said, “that we can be great in other ways——”

“Oh, let the Comte de Vandenesse preach to us!” cried Madame de Serizy.

“With all the more reason because he has preached by example,” said the Baronne de Nucingen.

“On my honor!” said General de Montriveau, “in all the dramas—a word you are very fond of,” he said, looking at Blondet—“in which the finger of God has been visible, the most frightful I ever knew was very near being by my act——”

“Well, tell us all about it!” cried Lady Barimore; “I love to shudder!”

“It is the taste of a virtuous woman,” replied de Marsay, looking at Lord Dudley’s lovely daughter.

“During the campaign of 1812,” General de Montriveau began, “I was the involuntary cause of a terrible disaster which may be of use to you, Doctor Bianchon,” turning to me, “since while devoting yourself to the human body you concern yourself with the mind; it may help solve some problems of the will.

“I was in my second campaign, enjoying danger and laughing at everything like the young foolish lieutenant of artillery I was. When we reached the Berezina, the army had lost discipline and forgotten obedience. It was a medley of men of all nations, instinctively making their way south. Soldiers would drive off a general in rags and barefoot if he brought neither wood nor victuals. After the passage of that river disorder did not diminish. I had come quietly and alone, without food, out of the marshes of Zembin, wandering in search of a house where I might be taken in. Finding none or being driven away, towards evening I perceived a faint smoke above a wretched little Polish farm. Hoping to find comrades more compassionate, I went in. The table was laid. Several officers and a woman—common enough—were eating potatoes, some horseflesh broiled over charcoal, and frozen beetroots. I recognized two or three artillery captains of my first regiment. I was welcomed with a shout that would have amazed me on the other side of the Berezina; but the cold was less intense; my comrades were resting, warm, had food, and the straw-strewn room promised a night. We did not ask for much then. My comrades could be philanthropists gratis—one of the commonest ways of being philanthropic. I sat down to eat on a bundle of straw.

“At the end of the table, by the door into the smaller straw-room, sat my old colonel—one of the most extraordinary men I ever met. He was Italian, tall, powerfully built but alert as a greyhound, with black curls, a complexion as white as a woman’s, small hands, a shapely foot, a pleasant mouth, and an aquiline nose whose tip pinched and whitened when he was angry. His irascibility was beyond belief; no one could be calm in his presence. He had taken a fancy to me and thought everything I did right. When angry his brow knit in a horseshoe mark more terrifying than the flashes of his blue eyes. His strength became almost unbounded. He spoke with a strong guttural roll that lent force to every syllable; though often a grace, it was formidable when he commanded. When quiescent his blue eyes were angelic and his brow charming. On parade with the army of Italy not a man compared with him—d’Orsay himself was eclipsed by our colonel at the last review held by Napoleon before the invasion of Russia.

“Everything in him was contrast; passion lives on contrast. Hence he exerted irresistible influence over women, yet he was not a lady-killer, or was indifferent to such successes.

“To show his violence I will recall an episode. We were dragging our guns up a narrow road, when we met another artillery regiment. The other colonel wanted our captain to back down; our captain refused. Their foremost battery advanced and a wheel struck our captain’s right leg, breaking it and throwing him over the side of his horse. Our Colonel, a little way off, guessed a quarrel; he galloped among the guns at the risk of falling, and reached the spot face to face with the other colonel just as the captain fell, calling ‘Help!’ No, our Italian colonel was no longer human! Foam rose to his lips; he roared like a lion, gave a terrific signal to his antagonist, drawing his sword. The two colonels went aside. In two seconds the other colonel lay with his skull split in two. The soldiers backed—pretty quickly too.

“The captain, so nearly crushed, lay yelping in the puddle; he had an Italian wife, a beautiful Sicilian of Messina not indifferent to our Colonel. This circumstance aggravated his rage. He felt pledged to protect the husband as he would the woman.

“In the hovel beyond Zembin, where I had been so well received, this captain sat opposite me, his wife at the other end facing the Colonel. Rosina was a little, very dark Sicilian, with the fire of the South in her almond-shaped eyes. She was deplorably thin, her face dusty, scarcely clothed, exhausted, her hair disordered under a shawl, yet still with the graces of a woman—small rose mouth, white teeth, features and figure that misery had not quite defaced. She had a frame fragile in appearance but wiry and springy. Her husband, a Piedmont gentleman, had an ironical simplicity in his face—brave and well informed—seeming to know nothing of the connection that had existed between his wife and the Colonel for three years. I ascribed his unconcern to Italian manners or domestic secrets; yet a restless thin underlip betrayed, as I thought, a streak of cruelty in a character that otherwise seemed phlegmatic.

“The conversation was not sparkling. My weary comrades ate in silence; they asked me some questions, and we related misadventures, reflections on the campaign, the generals, the Russians, and the cold. After his meagre meal the colonel wiped his moustache, bade us good-night, shot a black look at the Italian woman saying, ‘Rosina?’ and, without waiting for an answer, went into the little barn full of hay to bed. The meaning of his call was evident. The young wife made an indescribable gesture, expressing annoyance at seeing her thralldom flaunted and the offence to her dignity and to her husband. In the rigid setting of her features there was a sort of presentiment; perhaps she foresaw her fate. Rosina remained in her place.

“A minute later, apparently when the Colonel was snug in his straw, he repeated, ‘Rosina?’ The tone was more brutally questioning. Rosina turned pale, rose, passed behind us, and went to the Colonel. All sat in silence; I, unluckily, after looking at them all, began to laugh, and then they laughed too.

“‘Tu ridi?—you laugh?’ said the husband.

“‘On my honor, old comrade,’ I answered, serious, ‘I confess I was wrong; I ask your pardon a thousand times, and if you are not satisfied by my apologies I am ready to give you satisfaction.’

“‘Oh! it is not you who are wrong, it is I!’ he replied coldly.

“We laid down then, and before long were asleep.

“Next morning each one, without rousing his neighbor, set out again, with that selfishness which made our rout one of the most horrible dramas of self-seeking, melancholy, and horror ever enacted. Nevertheless, at about seven or eight hundred paces from our shelter we met again and walked on together, like geese led in flocks by a child’s wilful tyranny. The same necessity urged us all.

“Having reached a knoll where we could still see the farmhouse, we heard sounds like roaring lions and bulls—no, a noise without known comparison. Mingling with this horrible roar we heard a woman’s feeble scream. We all looked round, seized by an impulse of terror; we no longer saw the house, but a huge bonfire. The farmhouse had been barricaded and was in flames. Swirls of smoke on the wind carried hoarse cries and an indescribable pungent smell. A few yards behind, the captain quietly approached to join our caravan; we gazed at him in silence, for no one dared question him; but he, understanding our curiosity, pointed to his breast with his right forefinger, waved his left in the direction of the fire, and said, ‘Son’io.’ We all walked on without a word.”

“There is nothing more terrible than the revolt of a sheep,” said de Marsay.

“It would be frightful to leave us with this picture in our memory,” said Madame de Montcornet. “I shall dream of it——”

“And what was the punishment of Monsieur de Marsay’s ‘First’?” said Lord Dudley, smiling.

“When the English are in jest, their foils have the buttons on,” said Blondet.

“Monsieur Bianchon can tell us, for he saw her dying,” replied de Marsay, turning to me.

“Yes,” I said; “and her end was one of the most beautiful I ever saw. The Duke and I had spent the night by the dying woman’s pillow; pulmonary consumption in the last stage left no hope; she had taken the sacrament the day before. The Duke had fallen asleep. The Duchess, waking about four in the morning, signed to me with a friendly smile to leave him to rest, and she meanwhile was about to die. She was incredibly thin, yet her face retained a sublime outline. Her pallor made her skin look like porcelain with a light within. Her bright eyes and color contrasted with this languid complexion; her countenance was full of expressive calm. She seemed to pity the Duke, a lofty tenderness that, as death approached, seemed boundless. The silence was absolute. The room, softly lighted by a lamp, looked like every sickroom at the hour of death.

“At this moment the clock struck. The Duke awoke, despairing at having fallen asleep. I did not see the impatient gesture by which he showed regret at having lost sight of his wife for a few last minutes; but it is certain any one but the dying woman might have misunderstood it. A busy statesman, always thinking of France’s interests, the Duke had a thousand odd ways on the surface, such as often lead a man of genius to be mistaken for a madman—explanations lying in the exquisiteness and exacting needs of their intellect. He sat in an armchair by his wife, looking fixedly at her. The dying woman put out her hand a little way, took her husband’s and clasped it feebly; and in a low but agitated voice she said, ‘My poor dear, who is left to understand you now?’ Then she died, looking at him.”

“The stories the doctor tells us,” said the Comte de Vandenesse, “always leave a deep impression.”

“But a sweet one,” said Mademoiselle des Touches, rising.

PARIS, June 1839–42.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Bianchon, Horace — Father Goriot; The Atheist’s Mass; César Birotteau; The Commission in Lunacy; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Bachelor’s Establishment; The Secrets of a Princess; The Government Clerks; Pierrette; A Study of Woman; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Honorine; The Seamy Side of History; The Magic Skin; A Second Home; A Prince of Bohemia; Letters of Two Brides; The Muse of the Department; The Imaginary Mistress; The Middle Classes; Cousin Betty; The Country Parson. (Also narrated La Grande Bretèche.)

Blondet, Émile — Jealousies of a Country Town; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Modeste Mignon; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve; The Firm of Nucingen; The Peasantry.

Blondet, Virginie (Madame Montcornet) — Jealousies of a Country Town; The Secrets of a Princess; The Peasantry; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; The Member for Arcis; A Daughter of Eve.

Bridau, Joseph — The Purse; A Bachelor’s Establishment; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Start in Life; Modeste Mignon; Pierre Grassou; Letters of Two Brides; Cousin Betty; The Member for Arcis.

Canalis, Constant-Cyr-Melchior, Baron de — Letters of Two Brides; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Modeste Mignon; The Magic Skin; A Start in Life; Béatrix; The Unconscious Humorists; The Member for Arcis.

Dudley, Lord — The Lily of the Valley; The Thirteen; A Man of Business; A Daughter of Eve.

Espard, Jeanne-Clémentine-Athénaïs de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d’ — The Commission in Lunacy; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Letters of Two Brides; The Gondreville Mystery; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve; Béatrix.

Laginski, Comte Adam Mitgislas — The Imaginary Mistress; Cousin Betty.

Marsay, Henri de — The Thirteen; The Unconscious Humorists; The Lily of the Valley; Father Goriot; Jealousies of a Country Town; Ursule Mirouet; A Marriage Settlement; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Letters of Two Brides; The Ball at Sceaux; Modeste Mignon; The Secrets of a Princess; The Gondreville Mystery; A Daughter of Eve.

Maufrigneuse, Duchesse de — The Secrets of a Princess; Modeste Mignon; Jealousies of a Country Town; The Muse of the Department; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Letters of Two Brides; The Gondreville Mystery; The Member for Arcis.

Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de — The Thirteen; Father Goriot; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Pierrette; The Member for Arcis.

Nucingen, Baron Frédéric de — The Firm of Nucingen; Father Goriot; Pierrette; César Birotteau; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Secrets of a Princess; A Man of Business; Cousin Betty; The Muse of the Department; The Unconscious Humorists.

Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de — Father Goriot; The Thirteen; Eugénie Grandet; César Birotteau; Melmoth Reconciled; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; The Commission in Lunacy; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Modeste Mignon; The Firm of Nucingen; A Daughter of Eve; The Member for Arcis.

Portenduere, Vicomtesse Savinien de — Ursule Mirouet; Béatrix.

Rastignac, Eugène de — Father Goriot; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Ball at Sceaux; The Commission in Lunacy; A Study of Woman; The Magic Skin; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve; The Gondreville Mystery; The Firm of Nucingen; Cousin Betty; The Member for Arcis; The Unconscious Humorists.

Ronquerolles, Marquis de — The Imaginary Mistress; The Peasantry; Ursule Mirouet; A Woman of Thirty; The Thirteen; The Member for Arcis.

Serizy, Comtesse de — A Start in Life; The Thirteen; Ursule Mirouet; A Woman of Thirty; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Imaginary Mistress.

Touches, Mademoiselle Félicité des — Béatrix; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Bachelor’s Establishment; A Daughter of Eve; Honorine; Béatrix; The Muse of the Department.

Vandenesse, Comte Félix de — The Lily of the Valley; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; César Birotteau; Letters of Two Brides; A Start in Life; The Marriage Settlement; The Secrets of a Princess; The Gondreville Mystery; A Daughter of Eve.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
MIDDLE OF THE STORY — PART TWO
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################