DEDICATION

To Louis Boulanger, Painter.

A WOMAN OF THIRTY

I. EARLY MISTAKES

It was a Sunday morning in early April 1813, a bright day when Parisians first saw dry pavements and a cloudless sky. Before noon a luxurious cabriolet drawn by two spirited horses turned from the Rue de Castiglione into the Rue de Rivoli and stopped behind carriages before the newly opened barrier on the Terrasse de Feuillants. The carriage owner looked anxious and ill; the thin hair on his sallow temples already showed gray. He flung the reins to a servant and lifted a young girl from the carriage—her dainty beauty drawing the eyes of loungers. She stood on the step, yielding graciously as he took her by the waist and set her down without ruffling the trimming of her green rep dress. No lover would have been so careful; the stranger could only be her father, who took her arm familiarly and hurried into the Tuileries Gardens.

The old man noted the curious stares and smiled for a moment, vain of such illusory delights. “They think you are my wife,” he whispered, and walked with slow steps which filled his daughter with despair.

He seemed to play the coquette’s part for her; perhaps he took the greater gratification in the attention. Her dress and trim figure, low-cut bodice and embroidered chemisette, plum-colored shoes, and open-work silk stockings caught many a glance. Her brown tresses framed an almond-shaped face, with liquid bright eyes shaded by long lashes and arched brows. Youth and life glowed in the petulant face and graceful bust.

Yet the young lady seemed indifferent to admiration, fixing anxious eyes on the Tuileries Palace, the goal of her promenade. It was the thirteenth Sunday of 1813. In two days Napoleon would set out on the campaign that led to Lutzen, Bautzen, and the disaster of Leipsic. The Emperor's magnificent review was to be the last of such pageants. The throng came with a sense of sadness and the consciousness that they were witnessing a farewell.

“Do let us go more quickly, father; I can hear the drums,” she urged, half-teasing.

“They are marching into the Tuileries,” he answered.

“Or out of it—everybody is coming away,” she pouted, and he smiled.

They reached the peristyle under the tower where the tricolor still waved, but the sentries forbade entrance through the arcade between the Tuileries Gardens and the Place du Carrousel.

“We were too late, father,” she fretted.

“Very well, Julie—let us go. You dislike a crush.”

“Do let us stay, father. Even here I may catch a glimpse of the Emperor; he might die in the campaign, and then I should never have seen him.”

Her selfish words made the old man shudder. He detected tears in her voice and perhaps saw them in her lowered eyelids. Suddenly Julie cried out; an officer within the barrier, hearing, recognized her and set aside his own order. He drew her and her father toward the Place du Carrousel, securing them a good place. Julie’s joy was evident; she bent her head graciously as the officer bowed and left.

The old man stood a little behind, watching both the spectacle and, furtively, the officer whom neither had yet noticed intimately. The Place du Carrousel was full: a dense living mass of spectators, the regiments of the Old Guard in blue columns, the Triumphal Arch, the bands and lancers—all arranged with military symmetry. Sunlight flashed from bayonets; a breeze ruffled plumes; the scene was framed by the towering walls of the Tuileries and filled with an enthusiasm that seemed almost religious. The soldiers were France’s last hope; many in the crowd felt as if they were taking farewell of the Emperor.

At half-past twelve Napoleon appeared: short, somewhat stout in green uniform, with his cocked hat and the red ribbon of the Legion of Honor. Drums and bands struck up; the crowd cried “Long live the Emperor!” He sat resolute on his horse, his presence setting life into the silent ranks.

Julie’s attention, having been split between Napoleon and the troops, now fixed wholly on a young orderly officer moving among the lines, galloping to and from the Emperor. He rode a splendid black horse; his sky-blue uniform and gold lace set him apart. When the manoeuvres ended he galloped near Julie—Colonel Victor d’Aiglemont, not yet thirty, tall, slender, courageous, the model of an imperial hero. She watched his soldierly splendor with increasing interest and, when his frightened horse reared, cried out in alarm. The officer regained control and rode off at Napoleon’s command. Julie, dizzy with sights, clung to her father’s arm with a convulsive grip that revealed her secret. The old man saw it all and, with foreboding, led her away into the Gardens.

“Why, father, there are still regiments to be passed,” she protested.

“No, child, all the troops are marching out.”

“But I think he told them to advance—”

“I feel ill; I do not care to stay.”

“You talk of death again,” she reproached. He lamented how devoted parents are repaid by children’s indifference, and, seeing her blush, declared he believed she loved the colonel. He warned her that soldiers like Victor, with their gaiety and carelessness, were poor husbands—spendthrifts, selfish, without the delicacy of heart which cherishes a woman’s happiness. Julie, half-amused, half-irritated, promised to say no more about Victor for the present, and the old man, moved, pressed her hand.

Nearly a year later, in early March 1814, a calèche rolled from Amboise to Tours. As the carriage crossed the bridge over the Cise near the Loire, the horses halted: a trace had broken. The break gave the occupants, Julie and Colonel d’Aiglemont, a leisurely view of Touraine—meandering rivers, green meadows, the cliffs of Vouvray with vine-dressers’ caves, and Tours itself rising like a city out of the islands. It was a landscape to haunt the memory.

The postilion’s repairs done, the Colonel stretched and woke the young woman in a sable traveling cap and fur pelisse. The frivolous, lively girl who had skipped to the Tuileries was scarcely recognizable in Julie d’Aiglemont, for she had grown pallid, her face wan, her eyes glittering through violet shadows. She displayed no curiosity for the Loire scenery, and when a young Englishman rode by, the Colonel scowled at the foreigner’s insolence. The stranger—one of the British subjects detained by Napoleon—glanced at Julie and looked away. The Countess scarcely noticed. The carriage reached Tours, and they stopped at the old mansion of the Marquise de Listomère-Landon.

The Marquise, with white hair and an experienced air, welcomed them warmly. Julie’s melancholy impressed her, and while the Colonel hurried off, the aunt detected that her niece’s sadness was not simply widowhood or separation; she suspected secrets of the heart. The Marquise, curious and warm, soon won Julie’s confidence by kindly humor, and the two grew close. Within a month Julie’s singular sadness drew the Marquise into a deep attachment; the young Countess became her companion.

Julie, in solitude, wrote a letter to her friend Louisa revealing her disillusion with marriage. The Marquise found and read it. The letter recalled the days when the two girls had promised to reveal the mysteries of marriage to each other; Julie’s youthful trust had been broken. She confessed that her marriage to Colonel Victor d’Aiglemont had changed her—her joy had faded into a sense of oppression. The dowager, experienced and ironic, guessed the cause: Victor’s barrack-gaiety and ignorance of women. She comforted Julie, offering counsel to correct the divergence between them and avoid mutual hatred.

Julie, comforted, slept under the Marquise’s care. Next morning the light of the Englishman’s frequently passing horse roused comment. The Marquise evoked his story: Arthur Ormand, Lord Grenville, detained in Montpellier years earlier, had cured himself by studying medicine and had become a solitary, proud figure in Tours; he had evidently taken a liking to Julie. The Marquise teased, and Julie, with repugnance rather than triumph, revealed she loved no one, which both puzzled and amused the aunt.

Soon a change: Napoleon fell, the Bourbons returned, and Victor, now warmly received by the Comte d’Artois, obtained a commission in the Life Guards. He urged Julie to join him in Orléans; the Marquise would go to Paris to help them. Julie left under escort. During the journey an Englishman—Lord Grenville—followed them with determined attention; he later intervened at Orléans to secure Julie’s safe passage, earning her thanks. She reached Paris and found Victor, who had been promoted; but the Marquise de Listomère-Landon died of joy and gout when the Duc d’Angoulême returned to Tours—an irreparable loss to Julie, who had lost her protector and guide.

Victor d’Aiglemont, like many superficially competent men, masked incapacity with rank, ceremony, and vanity. He had been taken for a soldier of dash and had become a Marquis and Lieutenant-General under the Restoration, cultivating an air of wisdom though he was essentially shallow. At home he felt his wife superior and yielded to her influence; Julie, forced into the advisory role, felt humiliated and burdened. She protected her husband’s honor and household while bearing inner misery. Her health declined—an inflammatory, nameless complaint whispered about in salons. Doctors ordered rest; she became more of an invalid, going out only in a closed carriage. Yet she had beauty, a famous voice, and occasional society successes.

In 1817 a daughter, Hélène, was born; Julie nursed her and found brief respite in motherhood. For two years the child softened life’s hardships. But by 1819 the marriage grew worse. The husband’s indifference crystallized into separation of minds. Julie’s tact and prudence walled off her sufferings, but the thought of her child’s future made her resolve to live. She feared her husband’s susceptibility to unbridled passion and dreaded the ruinous consequences for their daughter.

Memory often took her back to the review at the Tuileries; Arthur’s face appeared nobler in recollection than before. His shy, silent love had been the single sweetness since marriage. She sometimes vowed to seek happiness at any cost; often she sank into stupor. Conscience and piety saved her again and again. Her instinct to shield herself and her child led to resolve and occasional strategic behavior. She resolved to win back Victor by dazzling society, to captivate him again. But her nature was too noble; she could not long maintain the artifice of coquetry.

She ventured into society at Mme. de Sérizy’s concert, and triumphed—her singing drew the rooms. But Arthur’s presence among the audience unnerved her; a momentary falter at the piano precipitated whisper and speculation. D’Aiglemont, who sarcastically declared his marriage ornamental, admitted he had no ground for jealousy—so he supposed. Arthur, more bluntly, proposed to cure Julie of her ailment through a regimen of travel, money, and medical care; he promised to consult the Marquis and do nothing without consent. The offer scandalized and tempted; in the end Julie accepted.

Montcontour, an old chateau on the Loire with vineyards and rock-hewn cellars, became the scene of convalescence. One August evening in 1821, Julie and Lord Grenville climbed the scented hillside together. She was transformed: health and vitality returned; her eyes sparkled with life. Arthur led her gently, finding smooth paths and pointing out the landscape where years before fate had first set them on this course. They sat in silence before the wide Loire country; gratitude spilled from Julie’s lips. He, having watched over her for a year—moving her for health among Aix and La Rochelle and tending her like a gardener tending a rare flower—was moved to tears by her thanks.

Their close sympathy deepened into love. Julie acknowledged the gift of life and joy he had given. Yet she insisted on honor: she could not be his. At a poignant moment, with D’Aiglemont and the child visible below, she told Arthur that he must leave France; they must part to avoid temptation and preserve virtue. Both yielded to the sacrifice: Arthur agreed; they would part and never meet. They walked by the river in dying light and then separated that evening—he left next morning.

On the journey back, Victor showed renewed ardor; Julie received his attentions with guarded composure. She had won a short-lived reinvigoration of his interest, but her inner resolution held: she would live blamelessly and yet be dead to him in feeling. She asserted rules: she would obey society’s code, keep her duties, and preserve herself and her daughter’s honor. Thus husband and wife began to live more apart, meeting frequently in the world but rarely at home—a kind of genteel separation.

Two years passed. One evening at home with Mme. de Wimphen, the Marquise spoke of the boar-hunt and Victor’s absences. She confided to her friend that she took laudanum to sleep and spent only part of each day awake with her child. Then a letter arrived: Arthur had written; he had been in Paris and had seen Julie; he was dying and wanted to say farewell. He came in person. Lord Grenville, thin and haggard, entered—his emotion stunned the women. He confessed that he had come in desperation; his pistol accidentally fell from his pocket. He had meant to die, perhaps with her, but seeing her he renounced the design and vowed to suffer in silence.

Julie, overcome, took him to the child’s bedside; Hélène awoke and cried “Mamma,” and maternal instincts conquered passion. Arthur offered to take the child with them; she recoiled at the thought of taking the child from her father and the world. The lovers were interrupted: Victor returned unexpectedly. Arthur hid in a dressing-room; his hand was caught in the door and crushed as it closed. The General, unaware, asked for a handkerchief. Julie, cool and composed, explained the noise away. The details of that night remain obscure, but the next day Julie was in bed for days with shock, and the rumor spread about what had happened.

Soon Lord Grenville’s funeral filled Parisian tongues. Ronquerolles asked d’Aiglemont about the strange event. The Marquis casually reported the story: the curtains of Hélène’s cot had caught fire, his wife had been so shocked she would not recover for a year according to the doctor; yet when asked about Lord Grenville’s death, he made the cold jest that Englishmen die in romantic fashions and hinted that the poor Arthur had perished because of the woman—never suspecting, or wishing not to suspect, the larger truth.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Between the Seine and the little river Loing lies a wide, flat country, skirted on one side by the Forest of Fontainebleau and bounded to the south by Moret, Montereau, and Nemours. It is a dreary region; knolls appear only rarely, a coppice here and there affords game, and beyond on every side stretches the endless gray or yellowish horizon of Beauce, Sologne, and Berri.

In the plain’s center, equidistant from Moret and Montereau, stands the old château of Saint-Lange amid dignified surroundings—magnificent avenues of elms, great gardens surrounded by a moat, and walls about a huge manorial pile that represents the profits of the maltôte, the gains of farmers-general, legalized malversation, and the fortunes of great houses now brought low by the Civil Code.

An artist or dreamer straying along the rutted roads or over the heavy land would wonder how this romantic old place came to be set in a savanna of corn-land, a desert of chalk and sand where gaiety dies and melancholy is a product of the soil. The voiceless solitude and the monotonous horizon weigh on the spirits; these negative beauties suit a sorrow that refuses consolation.

Hither, at the close of 1820, came a young woman, well known in Paris for her charm, fair face, and wit; to the astonishment of the nearby village a mile away, this woman of high rank and fortune took up her abode at Saint-Lange.

From time immemorial the estate had been managed by a steward and lived in by old servants; farmers and laborers had seen no gentry at the château. The appearance of the lady of the manor caused a sensation.

A group gathered at the little wineshop at the road fork to watch the carriage pass. It went slowly; the Marquise had come from Paris with her own horses. Observers had ample opportunity to note a waiting-maid with a little dreamy-looking girl on her knee, and the child’s mother in the carriage, looking like a dying woman sent to the country by her doctors. Village politicians were displeased: any stir would be distasteful to an invalid.

That evening, drinking in a private room of the wineshop, the village notables concluded that such depression could mean only one thing: the Marquise was ruined. Her husband, the Marquis, was said to be away in Spain with the Duc d’Angoulême; perhaps she had come to retrench after losses on the Bourse—he was known as a great gambler. Maybe the estate would be cut up and sold, and the villagers schemed how to secure their share.

They sought to learn the truth through the servants, but none could explain why their mistress had come to the old château in winter instead of choosing a cheerful country house.

The mayor called to pay respects but was not admitted; the land-steward tried and failed. Madame la Marquise kept her room, only moving to the small adjoining drawing-room where she dined—if that could be called dining, since she only looked with disgust at the dishes and took the precise minimum of nourishment. After the meal she returned to the old-fashioned low chair in the embrasure of the one window that lit her room.

She saw her little girl for only a few minutes daily during the dismal dinner, and seemed scarcely able to bear the child’s presence. Such suppression of a mother’s love could indicate unheard-of anguish.

No servants were permitted near; her own woman was the only one she kept about her. The château must be perfectly quiet, the child must play at the other end of the house. The slightest sound had grown intolerable; even the child’s voice jarred upon her.

At first the countryside was deeply interested in these eccentricities, but time passed, every hypothesis had been advanced, and peasants thought no more of the invalid lady.

So the Marquise was left to herself. She might live on perfectly silent amid the silence she had created; there was nothing to draw her from the tapestried chamber where her grandmother had died and whither she herself had come to die gently, without witnesses, importunate solicitude, or insincere demonstrations of egoism that double the agony of death in cities.

She was twenty-six. At that age, still full of romantic illusions, the mind often dwells on death when it seems a friend. But youth is coy: death draws near and retreats, and youth plunges back into living men to find pain more pitiless than death. This woman refused to live; she would know the bitterness of reprieves and the moral apprenticeship to the egoism that takes the bloom from the heart.

This severe teaching is the usual outcome of early sorrows. For the first time in her life, the Marquise d’Aiglemont was truly suffering. It is an error to suppose such feeling can be reproduced exactly: once developed, the power to feel is always there, but the first storm yields most intensity. Pain’s sting lessens through repeated crises either by habituation or by a self-preserving inertia.

What kind of suffering counts as anguish? Nature prepares us for the loss of parents; physical suffering passes or ends in death; the young mother who loses her firstborn often finds consolation in another child. Such troubles are wounds and bruises that do not sap life’s springs. Great pain that becomes anguish must be so deadly that it includes past, present, and future in its grip, leaving no part of life whole; never again can one think as before. Anguish engraves itself on the soul, leaving seeds of disgust for all things. To be measureless it should strike when body and soul are at full strength, making great scars. Survivors return to the world with an actor’s countenance, knowing where to hide or play; life holds no inscrutable dark places for them.

For young women like the Marquise, the first poignant pain usually springs from love. A young, beautiful woman stakes her life; if that life fails her, the pangs are cruel, since first love is loveliest. This catastrophe has no painter or poet because the anguish eludes analysis and defies colors; it is never confessed. To console such a sufferer one must divine the past she clings to in bitterness like a remorse; the loss is an avalanche that laid all waste before settling.

The Marquise suffered from such anguish, unknown to the world because it condemns it while sentiment cherishes it, and a true woman’s conscience justifies it. Her tragedy was aggravated by circumstance: the man she had loved was young and generous; she had refused him in obedience to social laws, and he had died to save a woman’s honor, as the world calls it. To whom could she speak? Her tears would offend her husband, the origin of the tragedy. By all laws she was bound to silence. Such grief can only weep freely in solitude; she must consume it or be consumed—die or kill something within herself.

Day after day she sat gazing at the flat horizon—her life to come, visible at a glance. It presented outwardly the chill desolation that gnawed at her heart. Misty mornings, pale bright skies, low clouds under a gray dome matched her soul-sickness. Her youth seemed slowly turned to stone by an intolerable barren anguish. She suffered through and for herself; how could it end except in self-absorption? Ugly torturing thoughts probed her conscience: she felt double—one self that felt and one that thought; one that suffered and one that would suffer no more. Her mind traveled back to childhood joys, which she had not known how to value; scenes crowded up to show the deception of a marriage that was outwardly respectable but inwardly wretched. What had the delicate pride of young womanhood won? Love, she felt, had been foregone. Her grace, smile, and charm remained, but her beauty had become intolerable as a useless thing. She shrank at the thought of remaining incomplete: had not the inner self lost the power of receiving impressions with the zest that gives life its savor? Future impressions would be effaced as soon as received, and many thoughts that once moved her would move her no more.

After the creature’s childhood comes the heart’s childhood; this second infancy was over—her lover had taken it into the grave. Longings remained; she was young yet, but the completeness of youth had gone, and so much of life’s value and savor had gone. She would always bear seeds of sadness and mistrust ready to rob emotion of its fervor. Conscious that nothing now could give her the happiness she had dreamed, she believed herself guilty for having missed a union of body and soul, which would have lessened her pain. Something of the mortification of an actress cheated of her part mingled with the pain in every fiber of her heart and brain. Her nature had been thwarted, her vanity wounded, her woman’s generosity cheated of self-sacrifice. Exhausted by questions and conflicting ideas, she was powerless to seize a single thought.

Sometimes, as mists fell, she would throw her window open and stand motionless, breathing damp air unheedingly, her mind seemingly blank, the ceaseless hum of sorrow leaving her deaf to earth’s harmonies.

One noon, when the sun shone, her maid came without summons.

“This is the fourth time M. le Curé has come to see Mme. la Marquise; to-day he is so determined about it we did not know what to tell him.”

“He has come for money for the poor, no doubt; take him twenty-five louis from me.”

The woman returned. “M. le Curé will not take the money, my lady; he wants to speak to you.”

“Then let him come!” said Mme. d’Aiglemont with an involuntary shrug.

Mme. d’Aiglemont had lost her mother in early childhood and had been brought up in the relaxed notions of the Revolution; she had adopted her father’s philosophism and practised little religion. A priest seemed a civil servant of doubtful utility. In her position, religious teaching could only poison her wounds, and she meant to put the curé in his place, perhaps by bestowing a benefit to end his importunity.

At first sight the curé provoked no inclination to change her mind: a stout little man with a wrinkled, elderly face that awkwardly tried to smile, a bald square forehead furrowed with lines, scanty white hair, thick lips, a slightly curved nose, and a chin hidden in a double fold of wrinkles. Yet his voice was sweet. Looking more closely she saw tears in his eyes and an impress of sorrow that marked him.

“Madame la Marquise, the rich only come in trouble,” he said. “It is easy to see that the troubles of a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman who has lost neither children nor relatives are caused by wounds whose pangs religion alone can soothe. Your soul is in danger, madame. I do not speak now of the hereafter; it is my duty to open your eyes to your future life here on earth. You will pardon an old man for importunity which has your happiness for its object?”

“There is no more happiness for me, monsieur. I shall soon be, as you say, in your province; but it will be forever.”

“Nay, madame. You will not die of this pain. If you had been destined to die of it you would not be here at Saint-Lange. A definite regret is not so deadly as hope deferred. I have known others pass through more intolerable anguish and yet live.”

The Marquise looked incredulous.

“Madame, I know a man whose affliction was so sore that your trouble would seem light compared with his.” Perhaps loneliness had left her willing to listen; she gave the curé a questioning glance.

He told of an old man who lost wife and children: three sons in the army who all fell in the battles of the Hundred Days and Waterloo. The father waited anxiously for tidings, and in a night learned their fate. Yet he still lived, taking refuge in the sanctuary—he became a priest, consecrated by his tears.

Silence fell. The Marquise and the curé looked out at the foggy landscape. “Not a priest in a city, but a simple country curé,” he added.

“At Saint-Lange,” she said, drying her eyes.

“Yes, madame.”

The words sank into her heart with infinite sorrow. The curé’s deep voice, charged with plangent vibration, was the voice of one who had suffered.

“And if I do not die, monsieur, what will become of me?” she asked almost reverently.

“Have you not a child, madame?”

“Yes,” she said stiffly.

The curé gave her a doctor’s glance. He resolved to do all in his power to combat the evil spirit that had seized her.

“We must live on with our sorrows—religion alone offers us real consolation. Will you permit me to come again to speak to you as a man who can sympathize with every trouble?”

“Yes, monsieur, come back again. Thank you for thinking of me.”

This visit relaxed the strain; the priest’s words had a soothing influence. For a moment she felt a prisoner’s relief at a neighbor’s knock on the wall. But soon she sank back into bitterness, thinking a companion in misfortune could neither lighten her bondage nor her future.

The curé returned two days later determined to make progress toward religion. “Have you given thought to the mass of human suffering? Have you raised your eyes above our earth and seen the immensity of the universe?” he asked.

“No, monsieur. I cannot rise to such heights. Our social laws lie too heavily upon me and rend my heart with poignant anguish. Ah! the world!”

“Madame, we must obey both. Law is doctrine, custom the practice of society.”

“Obey society?” cried the Marquise. “Monsieur, it is the source of our woes. God laid down no law to make us miserable; mankind has perverted God’s work. Civilization deals harder measure to us women than nature. Nature imposes physical suffering; civilization has developed feelings which you cheat continually. We must give up our lives to you; you give us a few moments of yours. A man makes a choice, we blindly submit. Marriage in these days seems to me legalized prostitution. This is the cause of my wretchedness. Among so many miserable creatures I alone am bound to be silent; my marriage was my own doing.”

She stopped; bitter tears fell.

“In the depths of my wretchedness I found some sands on which to set foot and suffer at leisure. A great tempest swept everything away. I am helpless and alone, too weak to cope with storms.”

“We are never weak while God is with us,” said the priest. “If your cravings for affection cannot be satisfied here on earth, have you no duties?”

“Duties continually!” she exclaimed. “But where are the sentiments to give strength to perform them? Nothing from nothing; this is one of nature’s laws. Would you make trees break into leaf without sap? It is the same with human nature; in me the sap is dried up.”

“I speak not of religious sentiments from which resignation is born, but of motherhood, madame—”

“Stop, monsieur! I will be sincere with you. Alas! in future I can be sincere with no one; I am condemned to falsehood. The world requires grimaces. There are two kinds of motherhood. Only half of me has become a mother; it were better I had not been a mother at all. Hélène is not his child! Oh, do not start. At Saint-Lange there are volcanic depths whence lurid gleams and shocks shake fragile laws not based on nature. I have borne a child; I am a mother in the eyes of the law. But you, monsieur, with your compassionate soul, perhaps understand this cry of an unhappy woman who has suffered no lying illusions. God will judge me, but I obeyed His laws by giving way to affections He set in me.

“What is a child but the image of two beings, the fruit of blended sentiments? Unless owned by every fibre of the body and chord of tenderness in the heart—unless it recalls the bliss of love—unless it embodies the poetic dreams of a double life, it is an incomplete creation.

“My poor little Hélène is her father’s child, the offspring of duty and chance. In me she finds nothing but instinctive affection. Socially I am above reproach. Have I not sacrificed my life to my child? Her cries go to my heart; if she fell into water I should save her, but she is not in my heart.

“Ah! love set me dreaming of a motherhood more complete. In a vanished dream I held in my arms a child conceived in desire before it was begotten. For his child I could have acquiesced in any lot. He who died bearing the burden of the world will forgive this thought. The world, however, is merciless. My words are blasphemies in its ears. I would wage war on it and refashion its laws! Has it not turned my thoughts and feelings into sources of pain? My child is and is not.

“When Hélène speaks to me I wish her voice were different; when she looks at me I wish her eyes were other. She keeps me mindful of what should have been. I cannot bear her near me. I smile, try to make up for the affection she is defrauded of. I am wretched, too wretched to live. And I am supposed to be a pattern wife. I have committed no sins. I have fought down forbidden love; but if I kept the letter of the law, have I kept it in my heart? There has never been but one here,” she said, laying her hand on her breast, “one and no other; and my child feels it. Certain looks and tones mould a child’s nature; my poor one feels no thrill when I take her up. There are times I shudder to think that some day she may be my judge. Heaven grant she may not hate me! Rather let the tomb open for me—rather let me end my days here at Saint-Lange! I want to go back to the world where I shall find my other soul and become wholly a mother. Ah! forgive me, sir, I am mad. Those words choked me; now they are spoken. You are weeping—”

She heard the child return from a walk. “Hélène, my child, come here!” she called. The words sounded like a cry.

The little girl ran in, laughing with a butterfly she had caught; at her mother’s tears she grew quiet and received a kiss on her forehead.

“She will be very beautiful one day,” said the priest.

“She is her father’s child,” said the Marquise, kissing the child with eager warmth as if to pay a debt of affection.

“How hot you are, mamma!”

“There, go away, my angel,” said the Marquise.

The child went; she did not look back, perhaps glad to escape the sad face. A mother’s love speaks in smiles; the Marquise could not smile. She flushed under the curé’s eyes. She had hoped to act a mother’s part before him, but neither could deceive him. When a woman loves sincerely, a kiss breathes a soul; the formal kiss lacks that unction. The priest felt the difference and, with a keen glance, said:

“You are right, madame; it would be better for you if you were dead—”

“Ah!” she cried, “then you know all my misery; I see you do, Christian priest if you can guess my determination to die and sanction it. Yes, I meant to die, but lacked courage. The spirit was strong, the flesh weak; when my hand did not tremble the spirit wavered. I will confess my weakness. At night I would go to the lake; at the brink cowardice shrink me from self-destruction. Once I took laudanum; I was ill, but did not die. I thought I had emptied the phial but had taken only half the dose.”

“You are lost, madame,” the curé said gravely with tears. “You will go back into the world and deceive it. You will seek compensation and then will come a day of reckoning for your pleasures—”

“Do you think I shall bestow my heart’s treasures on the first impostor who can play passion’s comedy? That I would pollute my life for a moment of doubtful pleasure? No; the flame to consume my soul shall be love and nothing but love. Not every man has the soul that satisfies our nature. Such a soul is not found twice. A woman is nothing without love; beauty is nothing without pleasure. Even if happiness were offered again would the world not frown? I owe my daughter an honored mother. I am condemned to an iron circle with one shameful escape. The round of family duties is thankless and irksome. I shall curse life, but my child shall have a fair semblance of a mother. I will give her treasures of virtue for treasures of love I defraud her.

“I have not the mother’s desire to live to enjoy a child’s happiness. What will Hélène’s fate be? My own, beyond doubt. How can a mother ensure that the man she gives her daughter will be the husband of her heart? You pour scorn on miserable creatures who sell themselves for a few coins; while another union, horrible for different reasons, is tolerated—nay encouraged—by society, and a young girl is married to a man she has scarcely met. She is sold for her lifetime. If you allow no compensation for her sorrows you might at least respect her; the most virtuous cannot escape calumny. Open prostitution and shame; secret prostitution and unhappiness. As for portionless girls, they may die or go mad without pity. Beauty and virtue are not marketable in the bazaar where souls and bodies are bought. Why not disinherit daughters? Then people might choose companions by inclination.”

“Madame, you show that neither family spirit nor religion appeals to you. Why hesitate between social selfishness and personal selfishness?”

“The family—does such a thing exist? I decline to recognize as family a knot of individuals bidden by society to divide property and go their separate ways. A family should be a lasting association passed down by will and tradition. Our laws have broken up homes and estates; I see wreck and ruin.”

“Madame, you will only return to God when His hand has been heavy upon you, and I pray you have time enough to make your peace. Instead of looking to heaven for comfort you fix your eyes on earth. Philosophism and self-interest have invaded your heart; like children of the eighteenth century you are deaf to religion’s voice. The pleasures of this life bring only misery. You are about to make an exchange of sorrows.”

She smiled bitterly. “I will falsify your predictions,” she said. “I shall be faithful to him who died for me.”

“Sorrow is not likely to live long save in souls disciplined by religion,” he answered and lowered his eyes lest she read his doubts. Her energy had grieved him; he had seen her underlying self and despaired of softening a heart seared by affliction. The divine seed could not take root in such soil, and his gentle voice was drowned by self-pity. Yet he returned repeatedly with apostolic persistence, hoping to lead so noble a soul to God—until he discovered she only talked because it was sweet to speak of him who was no more. He refused to condone passion and confined conversation to generalities.

Spring came; with it the Marquise found distraction and busied herself with estate improvements for amusement. By October she left the old château. In the leisure of Saint-Lange she had recovered from the first violent paroxysms of grief, which had slackened into melancholy. Melancholy is made of successive oscillations from despair to the border between pain and pleasure; in youth it is a twilight of dawn.

As she drove through the village in her traveling carriage she met the curé returning from church. She bowed but with lowered eyes and averted face. She did not wish to see him again. The village curé had judged this poor Diana of Ephesus only too well.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Madame Firmiani was giving a ball. M. Charles de Vandenesse, a promising young man bearing a historic name linked to France’s glory, had letters of introduction to some of the hostess’s friends in Naples and had come to thank her and take his leave.

Vandenesse had performed creditably on several diplomatic missions; now appointed attaché to a plenipotentiary at the Congress of Laybach, he planned to study Italy en route. This ball was a farewell to Paris and its entertainments, to the intellectual whirl and maelstrom of pleasure. Charles had little to regret, accustomed for three years to salute capitals and turn his back at a diplomatist’s bidding. Women no longer impressed him much; perhaps he thought real passion incompatible with a diplomat’s life, or that frivolous amusements were too empty for a man of character.

Scarcely thirty, Charles looked at life philosophically, concerned with theories and ends while others his age sought pleasure and sentiment. He forced back youthful generosity and enthusiasm, trying to convert natural warmth into gracious manners and cultivated arts; it is the ambitious man’s task to play a part to gain “a good position.”

He had been dancing and now cast a farewell glance over the rooms, partly from the feeling that keeps a theatre-goer in his box for the final tableau, partly to carry away a picture of light, laughter, and faces to compare with the novel scenes awaiting him in Naples. Somewhat poetical though hackneyed thoughts crossed his brain—a fastidious rather than jaded heart feeling a vague vacancy.

“These are the wealthiest and most fashionable women and the greatest ladies in Paris,” he thought. “These are the great men of the day—artists and men in power—and yet there seems nothing but petty intrigues and still-born loves, meaningless smiles and causeless scorn, eyes lighted by no inner flame, intellects running aimlessly to waste. All those faces are here not so much for enjoyment as to escape dullness. None of the emotion is genuine. If you desire simply to skim the surface of life, here is your world. I abhor stale intrigues ending in sub-prefectures and marriages; or if love comes, in stealthy compromises. Not a single eloquent face tells of a soul absorbed by one idea. There is no passion left, because we have no individuality. Italy at least is a land of sharp contrasts—woman there is a dangerous, unreasoning siren...”

Mme. Firmiani interrupted. “I want to introduce you to someone who has the greatest wish to make your acquaintance, after all she has heard of you,” she said, taking his arm, and led him to a woman by the hearth.

“Who is she?” Charles asked.

“You have heard her name more than once. She lives in seclusion—a perfect mystery,” Mme. Firmiani said.

“If ever you have been merciful, tell me her name.”

“She is the Marquise d’Aiglemont.”

“I will take lessons from her; she made a peer of France of that eminently ordinary man her husband. Pray tell me, did Lord Grenville die for her sake, do you think, as some say?”

“Possibly. Since that adventure, real or imaginary, she is much changed, poor thing! She has not gone into society since. Four years of constancy—that is something in Paris. If she is here to-night—” Mme. Firmiani broke off, adding with mystery, “I must say nothing. Go and talk with her.”

Charles stood motionless, leaning against the doorway, absorbed in scrutinizing a woman famous for reasons nobody could exactly say. Mme. d’Aiglemont’s reputation was no more extraordinary than many great reputations: men in travail over works never shown, politicians living on articles, artists whose performances never appear. “A man with a special subject” might have been invented for such kinds.

He gazed longer than he intended, vexed with himself for feeling so interested; the lady’s appearance refuted his ballroom generalizations.

The Marquise had reached thirty. She was beautiful despite a fragile form and delicate look. Her charm lay in a still face revealing unfathomed depths. Some haunting thought veiled the full brilliance of eyes that told of a fevered life and deep resignation. So seldom did she raise her eyelids soberly that it seemed the fire in her eyes was reserved for some occult contemplation. Any man of genius and feeling would be strangely attracted by her gentleness and silence. If one sought to explain a constant inward turning from present to past, one would find a proud soul bowed by memory. Everything about her fitted this impression. Like many women with long hair, she was very pale; the fineness of her skin indicated quick sensibility; her features showed minute delicacy. Perhaps her neck was rather long, but such necks belong to a graceful type, suggesting affinities between a woman’s head and a magnetic curve. An observer of human nature reads character in little movements of head and throat.

Her dress harmonized with the haunting thought that informed her. Her hair was gathered into a tall coronet of broad plaits, without ornament; she seemed to have bidden farewell to elaborate toilettes. Nor did the small arts of coquetry that spoil many women appear. Her bodice, modest though it was, did not wholly conceal a dainty figure; the gown looked rich from the distinction of its fashion, and its straight folds invested her with dignity. Perhaps she took minute care with hand and foot, but any affectation was absolved by the naturalness of her gestures.

All these little signs combine to make up a woman’s charm or lack of it, but with Mme. d’Aiglemont a dominating personality gave coherence to the details. Her manner matched her beauty and dress. Only certain women at a certain age put language into their attitude. Is it joy or sorrow that teaches a woman of thirty the secret of eloquence of carriage, so that she must always remain an enigma each interprets by his hopes and desires?

The way she leaned both elbows on the arm of her chair, the toying of interlaced fingers, the curve of her throat, the indolent lines of her body—her unstudied pose and utter lassitude—all suggested a woman for whom life had lost interest, who had known love only in dreams, bowed by memories, despairing of the future and herself, an unoccupied woman who took her emptiness for the nothingness of life.

Charles saw and admired the picture as an artistic success beyond ordinary powers. He knew d’Aiglemont and at once saw a disproportionate marriage, an incompatibility so great it was impossible that the Marquise loved her husband. Yet her life was above reproach, and the mystery was the more interesting. After the first surprise, Vandenesse cast about for a way to approach her, deciding on a clumsy bit of diplomacy to disconcert her.

“Madame,” he said, seating himself near her, “through a fortunate indiscretion I have learned that I have had the good fortune to attract your notice. I owe you thanks because I have never been so honored before. At the same time, you are responsible for one of my faults, for I mean never to be modest again—”

“You will make a mistake, monsieur,” she laughed; “vanity should be left to those who have nothing else to recommend them.”

Their conversation ranged over art, literature, politics, men and things, till insensibly they spoke of love, sentiment, and women.

“We are bond-slaves.”

“You are queens.”

These formulas summed the usual discourse. “Madame,” Charles said under his breath, “you have made me bitterly regret that I am leaving Paris. In Italy I shall not pass hours in intellectual enjoyment such as this has been.”

“Perhaps, monsieur, you will find happiness, and happiness is worth more than all the brilliant things—true and false—that are said every evening in Paris.”

Before Charles left he asked permission to pay a farewell call, and he felt lucky when his phrase was used in all sincerity; that night and the next day he could not put the Marquise from his mind.

At times he wondered why she had singled him out. He supplied an inexhaustible commentary of conjectures—sometimes it meant everything, sometimes nothing. He finally resolved not to yield to inclination and went to call on Mme. d’Aiglemont.

There are thoughts that determine conduct while we do not suspect their existence. For a young man a woman of thirty has irresistible attractions. A girl has too many young illusions; the instinct of sex counts for too much in her love for a young man to feel flattered by it. A woman of thirty knows the self-surrender involved; she acts with integrity of sentiment. The first yields; the second makes deliberate choice. That choice flatters—a woman armed with experience seems to give more than herself; while the inexperienced girl, unable to compare, can appreciate nothing at its just worth. A woman is a counselor and guide when we love to be guided; a girl meets us with naive curiosity rather than womanly tenderness. She affords a single triumph; a woman presents resistance upon resistance.

A girl cannot play the mistress’s part unless corrupt; a woman has a thousand ways of preserving power and dignity; she has risked so much for love that she must put him through transformations. A girl’s coquetry is simple; a woman’s is endless, shrouding herself in veil after veil, satisfying every demand of vanity. And there are terrors and hesitations—storms in a woman’s love not found in a young girl’s. At thirty a woman asks her lover to give back the esteem she may have forfeited for his sake; she lives for him and thinks of his future; she bids him succeed; she can obey, entreat, command, humble herself, or rise in pride. With all advantages of position she can be a girl again, assume bashfulness, grow fairer.

Between these feminine types lies the immeasurable difference separating foreseen from unforeseen, strength from weakness. A woman of thirty satisfies every requirement; a young girl must satisfy none. Such ideas in a young man’s mind strengthen passion, blending spontaneous feeling with the artificial sentiment created by manners.

The most decisive step in a woman’s life is the one she regards as insignificant. After marriage she is no longer her own mistress; she is queen and bond-slave of the domestic hearth. The sanctity of womanhood is incompatible with social liberty; for a woman, emancipation means corruption. If you give a stranger entry into the sanctuary of home, you put yourself at mercy. Or if she bids him in, is not that an offence? Society in France has chosen a middle course—looking on and laughing when offences come—condoning theft and punishing clumsiness. ’Tis an appalling punishment to have neighbors point the finger. Women are tenacious of respect; without esteem they cannot exist. The most corrupt seeks to pledge the future to buy absolution for the past and strives to make her lover understand that only irresistible bliss can barter the respect the world will refuse.

Such reflections cross a woman’s mind when she for the first time and alone receives a visit from a young man, especially if he is handsome or clever. And similarly many young men base secret hopes on ideas that justify the instinct that attracts them to a beautiful, witty, unhappy woman like Mme. d’Aiglemont.

She felt troubled when Charles was announced; he was almost confused despite his assurance. The Marquise took refuge in the friendliness women use as defence—an easy manner that admits no afterthought and paves the way to sentiment. In that ambiguous place where roads to indifference, respect, wonder, and passion meet, a woman may stay as long as she pleases, but only at thirty does she understand the possibilities. Laughter, tenderness, jest are all permitted; she has tact to find responsive chords in a man’s nature, judging the sounds she draws forth. Her silence is as dangerous as her speech. You will never read her at that age; she gives the right to a game of fence and by a glance or a gesture can close the combat, turning from you with your secret in her keeping, free to interest or mock you.

Mme. d’Aiglemont took up this neutral ground, preserving a high womanly dignity. The sorrows she never spoke of hung over her assumed gaiety like a cloud. When Vandenesse left after a surprisingly enjoyable conversation, he felt this conquest would be costly for his aspirations.

“It would mean sentiment from here to yonder,” he thought, “and correspondence enough to wear out a deputy second-clerk on his promotion. And yet if I really cared—”

Luckless phrase that has ruined many. In France the way to love lies through self-love. Charles went back to Mme. d’Aiglemont, imagining she showed pleasure in his conversion. Instead of yielding like a boy to falling in love, he tried to play a double role: act passion and keep cool enough to analyze the flirtation—lover and diplomatist at once; but youth and hot blood and analysis ended one way, over head and ears in love; the Marquise was his match. Each time he left her he scrutinized the progress of the affair.

“To-day she gave me to understand that she has been very unhappy and lonely,” he said to himself after the third visit, “and that but for her little girl she would have longed for death. She was perfectly resigned. Now as I am neither her brother nor her spiritual director, why should she confide in me? She loves me.”

Two days later he blamed modern manners. “Love takes on the hue of every age. In 1822 love is a doctrinaire. Instead of proving love by deeds, we take to argument and rhetoric. Women’s tactics are threefold: declare we cannot love as they do; grow pathetic to appeal to generosity or self-love; and have a craze for virginity. She must have thought me credulous. My good faith is like to be an excellent speculation.”

But suspicion wore out. He asked whether the Marquise was not sincere; could so much suffering be feigned? She lived in seclusion, drinking silently from a cup of sorrow guessed only by a chance exclamation in a controlled voice. From that moment Charles felt keen interest. Though his visits were recognized and tacitly arranged, he still thought her clever rather than sincere. “Decidedly, she is an uncommonly clever woman,” he said to himself.

When he came in she lay in her favorite melancholy attitude and looked at him with a glance like a smile. Her manner meant confidence and sincere friendship, but of love there was no trace. He sat and had nothing to say, troubled by a sensation for which no language exists.

“What is the matter with you?” she asked softly.

“Nothing.... Yes; I am thinking of something of which, as yet, you have not thought at all.”

“What is it?”

“Why—the Congress is over.”

“Well,” she said, “and ought you to have been at the Congress?”

A direct answer would have been the most eloquent declaration; but Charles did not make it. Before her candid friendship his calculations of vanity and a diplomatist’s doubts died. She did not suspect—or seemed not to suspect—his love; he admitted he had done nothing to warrant such a belief. For him that evening she was simple and friendly, sincere in sorrow, glad to have a friend, proud to find a nature responsive to her own—nothing more. It had not entered her mind that a woman could yield twice; love lay bleeding still in her heart; she believed not merely in intellect but in soul; for her love was not a simple attraction but a noble binding.

Charles became a young man again, enthralled by a lofty nature. He wished for fuller initiation into the secret history of a life blighted rather by fate than by fault. Mme. d’Aiglemont heard him ask the cause of her overwhelming sorrow; she gave him one searching look like a seal on some solemn compact.

“Ask no more,” she said. “Four years ago, on this very day, the man who loved me, for whom I would have given up everything, even my own self-respect, died, and died to save my name. That love was young and full of illusions when it ended. Before I gave way to passion—I had been drawn into the mistake that ruins many a girl’s life, a marriage with a man whose agreeable manners concealed his emptiness. Marriage plucked my hopes one by one. Now I have forfeited happiness through marriage, as well as the happiness styled criminal, and I have known no happiness. Nothing is left to me. If I could not die, at least I ought to be faithful to my memories.”

No tears came. Her eyes fell and her fingers twisted as usual. The short telling, with that gesture for comment, the might of anguish in a fragile woman, the dark depths masked by a fair face, the tears of four years’ mourning fascinated Vandenesse; he sat diminished before her greatness, seeing not merely physical beauty but a soul great in power to feel. He had found the ideal of his imaginings—the ideal invoked by those who view life as raw material for a passion many seek and die before grasping.

His thoughts seemed poor beside her words and beauty. Powerless to find words lofty enough, he took refuge in platitudes about women’s destiny.

“Madame, we must either forget our pain, or hollow out a tomb for ourselves.”

Reason cuts a poor figure beside sentiment; where one must feel, reasoning is limited. Vandenesse held his peace, sat with eyes on her, then came away, prey to thoughts exalting woman as a painter who suddenly confronts a noble antique.

He was deeply in love—loyal, fervent, and simple as a first passion, which carries ineffable charm. Delicious first passion of youth is often savored by the woman who calls it forth; at thirty a woman can look over love’s course—back to the past, forward to the future—knowing the price to be paid and enjoying bliss with the dread of losing it. Her soul is still fair though youth wanes, and passion strengthens from the dismay at coming days.

“This is love,” he said, “and for my misfortune I love a woman wedded to her memories. It is hard to struggle against a dead rival, never present to make blunders and fall out of favor, nothing left but his better qualities. What is it but treason against the Ideal to attempt to break the charm of memory, to destroy hopes that survive a lost lover who only awakened longings?”

Such reflections, the last efforts of diplomatic reasoning, expired. Thenceforward he knew no afterthoughts; he was the plaything of love and lost himself in the inexplicable happiness nourished by a chance word, a silence, or a vague hope. He tried to love Platonically, breathed the air she breathed, became almost part of her house, and went everywhere with her—slave to a passion compounded of egoism and devotion. Love has its instinct finding the way to the heart as an insect finds its flower; if feeling is sincere, its destiny is not doubtful. Let a woman begin to think her life depends on the sincerity of her lover and is there not sufficient thought to drag her through tortures of dread? It is impossible for a wife or mother to be secure from a young man’s love; she can refuse to see him, but this is too decided a step at an age when marriage has become a prosaic yoke and conjugal affection tepid. Everything is a snare. The seclusion in which Greeks and Orientals kept their women—and an example followed in modern England—is the only safeguard of domestic morality; but under it there is an end to the charm of social intercourse and refinement becomes impossible. Nations must take their choice.

So months went by and Mme. d’Aiglemont discovered her life closely bound to this young man’s, with something like pleasure that she shared his tastes and thoughts. Had she adopted Vandenesse’s ideas or he hers? She did not inquire. Swept into the current of passion, she still told herself with misgiving: “Ah! no. I will be faithful to him who died for me.”

Pascal said the doubt of God implies belief in God; similarly a woman parleying has surrendered. A day came when the Marquise admitted to herself she was loved, and with that admission a time of wavering among conflicting thoughts. Superstitions of experience spoke: should she be happy? Was it possible to find happiness outside social laws? Her cup had been full of bitterness; might happiness be bought too dear? Curiosity remained on the lover’s side. The secret tribunal sat till Vandenesse’s presence put reason to flight.

If such are the transformations through which sentiment passes in a young man and a woman of thirty, there comes a moment when reasonings end and desire absorbs thought. The longer resistance, the mightier love. From this moment every day adds color, clothes the dry bones with living flesh and the charm of youth, until they glow with sentiment’s persuasions and life’s loveliness.

Charles found Mme. d’Aiglemont absorbed, and to his “What is it?” she at first did not reply. The delicious question bore witness to unity of spirit; the Marquise felt that to speak of her sorrow would be to make an advance; she read herself with lucid glance and was silent.

“I am not feeling well,” she said at last.

“Madame,” said Charles, voice tender but unsteady, “soul and body depend on each other. If you were happy, you would be young and fresh. Why refuse to ask of love all that love has taken from you? You think your life is over when it is only beginning. Trust yourself to a friend’s care. It is so sweet to be loved.”

“I am old already,” she said; “there is no reason I should not continue to suffer. ‘One must love,’ do you say? Well, I must not and cannot. Your friendship has put sweetness into my life, but beside you I care for no one. A friend I accept; I should fly from a lover. Besides, would it be generous to exchange a withered heart for a young one; to smile on illusions I cannot share, to cause happiness in which I should either have no belief or tremble to lose? I should perhaps respond with egoism, weigh and deliberate while he felt; my memory would resent the poignancy of his happiness. No, if you love once, that love is never replaced. Indeed, who would have my heart at that price?”

There was a tinge of coquetry in the words, the last effort of discretion. “If he loses courage, well and good, I shall live alone and faithful.” The thought came from deep within her, a slender twig caught in vain by a swimmer swept out by the current.

Vandenesse’s involuntary shudder at her dictum pleaded for him more eloquently than all his assiduity. Nothing moves a woman so much as discovering a gracious delicacy in a man; she learned the strength of his affection from the intensity of his pain.

“Perhaps you are right,” he said coldly. “New love, new vexation.”

Then he changed the subject, spoke of indifferent matters; but visibly moved, he concentrated his gaze as if seeing her for the last time.

“Adieu, madame,” he said with emotion.

“Au revoir,” she answered with subtle coquetry.

He made no reply and went.

When Charles was gone, regrets flocked in and she found fault with herself. Passion advances as soon as a woman persuades herself she has failed in generosity or hurt a noble nature. Vandenesse stayed away for several days. Every evening the Marquise sat expectant in remorseful impatience. She could not write—that would be a declaration—and instinct told her he would come. On the sixth day he was announced and she heard his name with delight that frightened her.

“You have punished me well,” she said.

Vandenesse gazed in astonishment.

“Punished?” he echoed. “And for what?” He understood and meant to be avenged for all his past suffering as soon as she suspected it.

“Why have you not come to see me?” she asked, smiling.

“Then you have seen no visitors?” he parried.

“Yes. M. de Ronquerolles and M. de Marsay and young d’Escrignon came and stayed for nearly two hours, the first two yesterday, the last this morning. And besides, I have had calls, I believe, from Mme. Firmiani and your sister, Mme. de Listomère.”

Here was new torture—a monstrous jealousy, a perpetual desire to be the sole influence. “She has seen visitors, talked with happy creatures while I was unhappy and alone,” he thought, burying annoyance and consigning love to the depths like a coffin in the sea. His brow clouded; Mme. d’Aiglemont, by instinct, shared his sadness without understanding it. She had hurt him unwittingly. He discussed his position with her as if his jealousy were a hypothetical case. Then the Marquise understood and was so deeply moved she could not keep back tears—and so these lovers entered the heaven of love.

Heaven and Hell are imaginative conceptions of Joy and Sorrow—poles about which life revolves. Heaven now covers an infinite of human feeling; Hell, our power to suffer tortures so diverse that of pain it is possible to make art, since no two sorrows are alike.

One evening the two lovers sat alone, silently watching a fair transformation of the sky, a cloudless heaven taking pale gold and purple from the last rays. With the fading light, soft stirrings of passion awaken and a mysterious sense of trouble amid calm. Nature’s spectacle bids us enjoy or lament. In such moments speech is fraught; silence leaves eyes with the power of the heavens reflected. A least word has irresistible might.

Vandenesse and Julie—for she had allowed him to call her Julie—sat talking but had drifted far from their original subject; their spoken words grew meaningless, and they delighted in unspoken thoughts. Her hand lay in his; she abandoned it without thinking. They leaned forward to look on a majestic cloud country of snows and glaciers, a picture of sharp contrasts. As they leaned Julie’s hair brushed Vandenesse’s cheek. She shuddered, he more; they had reached one of those crises when quiet sharpens perception until the slightest shock fills the melancholy heart with tears or raises joy to ecstasy. Almost involuntarily Julie pressed his hand. That pressure gave courage to his timidity. The present joy and hopes of the future blended in the bashful trembling kiss he placed upon her cheek. The slighter the concession, the more insinuating it was. For both it was a sincere revelation. Two noble natures had met and blended, drawn by natural laws but held apart by ordinance.

General d’Aiglemont came in at that moment. “The Ministry has gone out,” he said. “Your uncle will be in the new cabinet. So you stand an uncommonly good chance of an embassy, Vandenesse.”

Charles and Julie looked at each other and flushed. That blush was one more tie; there was thought and remorse in both; between lovers guilty of a kiss there is a bond as strong and terrible as between two robbers who have murdered. Something had to be said.

“I do not care to leave Paris now,” Charles said.

“We know why,” the General replied with the knowing air of a man who discovers a secret. “You do not like to leave your uncle, because you do not wish to lose your chance of succeeding to the title.”

The Marquise took refuge in her room and passed a pitiless verdict on her husband: “His stupidity is really beyond anything!”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Between the Barrière d’Italie and the Barrière de la Santé, along the boulevard toward the Jardin des Plantes, you have a view of Paris capable of stirring even the most jaded artist or tourist. Climb to the slightly higher ground where the tree-shaded boulevard curves like a green, silent avenue, and you look down on a deep valley dotted with factories that seem almost countrylike among trees and the brown streams of the Bièvre or the Gobelins.

On the opposite slope, beneath thousands of roofs packed like heads in a crowd, lurks the squalor of the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. The imposing cupola of the Panthéon and the grim dome of the Val-de-Grâce tower over an amphitheatre of streets; each tier is grotesquely represented by crooked lines of houses, making the two monuments seem giants dwarfing small homes and tall poplars. To your left, a daylighted observatory, light flooding its windows and galleries, appears like a black spectral skeleton. Further, the elegant lantern tower of the Invalides rises between the bluish Luxembourg and the gray towers of Saint-Sulpice. From this standpoint architecture blends with leaves and shadows, changing with the sky. Afar, the sky seems full of buildings; near, serpentine curves of trees and green paths wind.

Away to your right, through a gap in this landscape, you see the canal Saint-Martin, a long pale stripe edged with reddish quays and fringed by a lime avenue. The long buildings beside it, in genuine Roman style, are public granaries. Beyond rise the smoke-dimmed slopes of Belleville, dotted with houses and windmills, their outlines merging with cloud. Between that vague horizon and the serried roofs in the valley lies a whole city hidden in a hollow between the pinnacles of the Hôpital de la Pitié and the ridge of the Cimetière de l’Est, between suffering and death; a city sending up a smothered roar as if to say, “I am here!”

When sunlight floods this strip of Paris—purifying outlines, kindling lights in panes, brightening red tiles, flaming about golden crosses, whitening walls, transforming the atmosphere into a gauzy veil, calling up rich contrasts of light and shadow; when the sky is blue, earth quivers in the heat, and bells peal—then you see one of those eloquent fairy scenes that stamp themselves on the imagination: scenes as adored as views of Naples or Byzantium. Nothing lacks to complete the harmony: the murmur of the world and the quiet of solitude, the voices of a million people and the voice of God. There lies a whole capital beneath the peaceful cypresses of Père-Lachaise.

One spring morning I stood with my back against a huge elm that flung yellow flowers to the wind, looking at this beauty. At the sight I thought bitterly of the scorn some feel for our land, and of pitiable plutocrats who, having forsaken France, gallop through Italy to sneer at their country. I cast loving eyes on modern Paris and began to dream when a kiss disturbed my solitude and put philosophy to flight. Down the sidewalk above the rippling water, beyond the Pont des Gobelins, I saw a woman dressed with the daintiest simplicity; she seemed still young, and the gladness of the landscape was reflected in her sweet face. Her companion, a handsome young man, had just set down a little boy. A prettier child I have never seen; to this day I do not know whether it was the child or his mother who received the kiss. In their faces, smiles, and movements you read the same deep tender thought. Their arms interlaced with a swift gladness; they drew close with unanimous impulse, unconscious of me. A second child, however—a little girl who had turned away in sullen discontent—threw me a glance that startled me. Pretty and engaging like her brother, she stood mute and motionless, her attitude and demeanor suggesting a torpid snake. There was something mechanical in the way the mother and companion paced up and down, content to walk between the bridge and a carriage waiting nearby, stopping, looking into each other’s eyes, laughing as their talk varied from lively to languid.

I watched this picture from my hiding-place by the elm and would have respected their privacy had I not made a chance discovery. In the brooding elder child I saw traces of thought overdeep for her age. When the mother and the young man turned and came near, the child’s head was often lowered; the furtive sidelong glances she gave them and the little brother were extraordinary. Sometimes the woman or her friend stroked the little boy’s curls or laid a caressing finger against his throat or collar as he played; on the little girl’s pallid face there flared shrewd subtlety, ingenuous malice, fierce intensity—traces of suffering or too-early thought preying on a soul in bud. Perhaps a mother knows; to me, an old man’s thoughts on a child’s forehead are dreadful; even blasphemy from girlish lips is less monstrous.

The stolidity of this child who had begun to think, her rare gestures, everything about her interested me. I scrutinized her, comparing her with her brother. Her brown hair and dark eyes and look of precocious power contrasted with the little one’s fair curls and sea-green eyes and winning helplessness. She was perhaps seven or eight; the boy about four. Both were dressed alike, but the little girl wore a linen collar with a plain hem while her brother’s was edged with dainty embroidery—another tacit preference a child can read in a mother’s soul. The fair-haired child, careless and glad, seemed almost girlish; his skin fair and fresh, his movements graceful, his look sweet. The older sister, despite energy and beauty, looked like a sickly little boy. In her bright eyes there was none of the humid softness of child charm; they seemed dried by an inner fire; her pallor had a swarthy olive tint, the sign of strong character. Twice her brother came to her, offering a tiny hunting-horn with a touching, winning look—“Here, Hélène, will you take it?”—but she only scowled. So sombre and vehement beneath apparent indifference, she shuddered and flushed when he came near; he seemed not to notice, and his unconscious earnestness marked the character difference: the child’s brow was overcast already by the gloom of a man’s knowledge and cares.

“Mamma, Hélène will not play,” cried the little one, seizing an opportunity to complain while the two stood silent on the Pont des Gobelins.

“Let her alone, Charles; you know very well she is always cross.”

Tears sprang to Hélène’s eyes at her mother’s thoughtless words. The child devoured the speech in silence, then gave her brother one of those sagacious looks that seemed inexplicable, glancing with a sinister expression from the bank to the Bièvre, then at the bridge and the view, and then at me.

Fearing to disturb the happy couple, I slipped away and took refuge behind a thicket of elder that screened me. Sitting quietly on the summit of the bank, I watched the landscape and the fierce-looking little girl; with my head almost level with the boulevard I could still see her through the leaves. Hélène seemed uneasy over my disappearance; her dark eyes searched the alley and behind the trees with indefinable curiosity. What was I to her? Then Charles’s baby laughter rang like a bird. The tall young man, with fair hair like the child’s, danced him in his arms, showering kisses, and the meaningless baby words of play rose to our ears. The mother looked on smiling, sometimes putting in a low word from the heart, for her companion would stop in full happiness, blue eyes turned toward her full of light and love. Their voices, blending with the child’s, reached me like a caress. The three figures, charming in themselves, composed a lovely scene in a glorious landscape: a delicately fair woman, radiant with smiles; a child of love; a young man of irresistible charm; a cloudless sky—nothing in nature lacking to complete perfect harmony. I found myself smiling as if their happiness were mine.

The clocks struck nine. The young man gave a tender embrace and went toward the tilbury which an old servant drove slowly to meet him. The lady grew grave and almost sad. The child’s prattle sounded through the last farewell kisses. Then the tilbury rolled away; the lady stood motionless, listening to the wheels, watching the little cloud of dust. Charles ran down the green path back to the bridge to join his sister. I heard his silver voice calling to her.

“Why did you not come to say good-bye to my good friend?” he cried.

Hélène looked up. Never surely did such hatred gleam from a child’s eyes as hers when she turned them on the brother beside her. She gave him an angry push. Charles lost his footing on the steep slope, stumbled over a root, and fell headlong, dashing his forehead on sharp-edged stones, covered with blood, and disappeared over the edge into the muddy river. The turbid water closed over a fair, bright head with a shower of splashes; one sharp shriek after another rang in my ears; then the sounds were stifled by the thick stream, and the poor child sank with a dull sound as if a stone had been thrown in. The accident happened with lightning swiftness. I sprang down the footpath, and Hélène, stupefied with horror, shrieked again and again:

“Mamma! mamma!”

The mother had flown to the spot like a bird. But neither a mother’s eyes nor mine could find where the little one had gone under. There was a wide space of black hurrying water, and below a bed of ten feet of mud. There was not the smallest possibility of saving the child. No one was stirring at that hour on a Sunday morning; there are neither barges nor anglers on the Bièvre. No creature was in sight, no pole to plumb the filthy stream. What need to explain how the ugly accident had happened—accident or misfortune, whichever it might be? Had Hélène avenged her father? Her jealousy surely was the sword of God. And yet when I looked at the mother I shivered. What fearful ordeal awaited her when she should return to her husband, the judge before whom she must stand all her days? And here with her was an inseparable, incorruptible witness. A child’s forehead is transparent; a child’s face hides no thoughts, and a lie, like a red flame within, colors the eyes. But the unhappy woman had not thought yet of the punishment awaiting her at home; she stared into the Bièvre.

Such an event must inevitably send ghastly echoes through a woman’s life, and here is one of the most terrible reverberations that troubled Julie’s love from time to time.

Several years had gone by. The Marquis de Vandenesse wore mourning for his father and had succeeded to his estates. One evening a notary was present in his house. This was no foppish lawyer but a solid Parisian notary, one of those estimable men who do a stupid thing pompously; he saw life as deeds and documents.

Mme. d’Aiglemont had dined with M. de Vandenesse; her husband had excused himself before dinner was over, for he was taking his two children to the play—some Boulevard theatre, the Ambigu-Comique or the Gaieté, melodrama judged harmless because innocence triumphs in the fifth act. The boy and girl had teased their father to be there before the curtain rose, so he had left before dessert.

The notary, imperturbable and incapable of asking why Mme. d’Aiglemont should have let husband and children go without her, stayed on as if screwed to his chair. Dinner lingered, dessert and coffee delayed by his chattering. These things consumed time and drew impatient movements from the charming Marquise; she looked like a thoroughbred pawing the ground before a race; but the man of law, delighted to be in the company of a woman of fashion and a political celebrity, exerted himself to shine in conversation, taking her forced smile for approbation, and talked on with unflagging spirit till she was almost out of patience.

The master of the house and the lady more than once maintained eloquent silence when the lawyer expected a civil reply; these pauses were employed by the talkative nuisance in looking for anecdotes in the fire. M. de Vandenesse consulted his watch; the charming Marquise pretended to fasten her bonnet strings and made as if to go. But the notary, blind and deaf, continued, convinced his powers could keep her.

“I shall certainly have that woman for a client,” he thought.

He was relating the discreditable ways by which one du Tillet, a favored stockbroker, had made his fortune, when the clock struck nine and M. de Vandenesse decided to send him away. He stopped him with a gesture.

“The tongs, my lord Marquis?” queried the notary, handing the object.

“No, monsieur, I am compelled to send you away. Mme. d’Aiglemont wishes to join her children, and I shall have the honor of escorting her.”

“Nine o’clock already! Time flies in pleasant company,” said the man of law, who had been talking for an hour.

He looked for his hat, planted himself before the fire with a suppressed hiccough; and, without heeding the Marquise’s withering glances, spoke once more to his impatient client:

“To sum up, my lord Marquis. Business before all things. To-morrow we must subpoena your brother; we will proceed to make out the inventory, and faith, after that----”

So ill had he understood directions that his impression was opposite to what was intended. It was a delicate matter, and Vandenesse, in spite of himself, began to set the notary right. The discussion took time.

“Listen,” the diplomatist said at a sign from the lady, “You are puzzling me; come back to-morrow, and if the writ is not issued by noon, the days of grace will expire, and then—”

As he spoke, a carriage entered the courtyard. The poor woman turned sharply away at the sound to hide tears in her eyes. The Marquis rang to tell the servant his master was not at home; but before the footman could answer the bell, the lady’s husband returned unexpectedly from the Gaieté, holding both children by the hand. The little girl’s eyes were red; the boy was fretful and cross.

“What can have happened?” asked the Marquise.

“I will tell you by and by,” said the General, and catching sight through an open door of newspapers on the table in the next room, he went off. The Marquise, at the end of her patience, flung herself on the sofa. The notary, thinking it incumbent to be amiable with the children, spoke to the little boy in an insinuating tone:

“Well, my little man, and what is there on at the theatre?”

“The Valley of the Torrent,” said Gustave sulkily.

“Upon my word,” declared the notary, “authors nowadays are half crazy. The Valley of the Torrent! Why not the Torrent of the Valley? It is conceivable a valley might be without a torrent; now if they had said the Torrent of the Valley, that would have been something clear. But never mind that. How is the drama to take place in a torrent and in a valley? You will tell me that the principal attraction lies in the scenic effect, and the title is a capital advertisement.—And did you enjoy it, my little friend?” he continued, sitting down before the child.

When the notary pursued his inquiries about a drama in a torrent, the little girl began to cry. Her mother did not notice this in her intense annoyance.

“Oh! yes, monsieur, I enjoyed it very much,” said the child. “There is a dear little boy in the play, and he was all alone in the world, because his papa could not have been his real papa. And when he came to the top of the bridge over the torrent, a big, naughty man with a beard, dressed all in black, came and threw him into the water. And then Hélène began to sob and cry, and everybody scolded us, and father brought us away quick, quick—”

M. de Vandenesse and the Marquise looked on in dull amazement, as if all power to think or move had been paralyzed.

“Do be quiet, Gustave!” cried the General. “I told you that you were not to talk about anything that happened at the play, and you have forgotten already.”

“Oh, my lord Marquis, your lordship must excuse him,” cried the notary. “I ought not to have asked questions, but I had no idea—”

“He ought not to have answered them,” said the General, looking sternly at the child.

It seemed the Marquise and the master perfectly understood why the children had come back so suddenly. Mme. d’Aiglemont looked at her daughter and rose as if to go to her, but a terrible convulsion passed over her face, and all that could be read in it was relentless severity.

“That will do, Hélène,” she said. “Go into the other room, and stop crying.”

“What can she have done, poor child!” asked the notary, thinking to appease the mother and stop Hélène’s tears in one stroke. “So pretty as she is, she must be as good as can be; never anything but a joy to her mother, I will be bound. Isn’t that so, my little girl?”

Hélène cowered, looked at her mother, dried her eyes, struggled for composure, and took refuge in the next room.

“And you, madame, are too good a mother not to love all your children alike. You are too good a woman, besides, to have any of those lamentable preferences which have such fatal effects, as we lawyers have only too much reason to know. Society goes through our hands; we see its passions in that most revolting form, greed. Here it is the mother of a family trying to disinherit her husband’s children to enrich the others whom she loves better; or it is the husband who tries to leave all his property to the child who has done his best to earn his mother’s hatred. And then begin quarrels, fears, deeds, defeasances, sham sales, trusts, and all the rest; a pretty mess, in fact, it is pitiable, upon my honor, pitiable! There are fathers that will spend their whole lives cheating their children and robbing their wives. Yes, robbing is the only word. We were talking of tragedy; oh! I can assure you that if we were at liberty to tell the real reasons of some donations I know, modern dramatists would have material for sensational bourgeois dramas. How the wife manages to get her way, as she invariably does, I cannot think; for in spite of appearances and of their weakness, it is always the women who carry the day. Ah! by the way, they don’t take me in. I always know the reason at the bottom of those predilections the world politely calls ‘unaccountable.’ But in justice to husbands, I must say they never discover anything. You will tell me that this is a merciful dispense—”

Hélène had come back to the drawing-room with her father and was listening. So well she understood all that was said that she gave her mother a frightened glance, feeling with a child’s quick instinct that these remarks would aggravate the punishment hanging over her. The Marquise turned her white face to Vandenesse and, with terror in her eyes, indicated her husband, who stood with his eyes fixed absently on the carpet’s pattern. The diplomatist, man of the world though he was, could no longer contain his wrath; he gave the man of law a withering glance.

“Step this way, sir,” he said, and went hastily to the ante-chamber; the notary left his sentence half-finished and followed, quaking, and the husband and wife were left together.

“Now, sir,” said the Marquise de Vandenesse—he banged the drawing-room door and spoke with concentrated rage—“ever since dinner you have done nothing but make blunders and talk folly. For heaven’s sake, go. You will make the most frightful mischief before you have done. If you are a clever man in your profession, keep to your profession; and if by any chance you go into society, endeavor to be more circumspect.”

With that he returned to the drawing-room, and did not even wish the notary good-evening. For a moment the worthy man stood dumfounded; then, when the buzzing in his ears subsided, he thought he heard someone moaning in the next room. Footsteps came and went, and bells were violently rung. He was by no means anxious to meet the Marquis again, and found the use of his legs to make good his escape, only to run against a hurrying crowd of servants at the door.

“Just the way of all these grand folk,” he said to himself in the street as he looked for a cab. “They lead you on to talk with compliments, and you think you are amusing them. Not a bit of it. They treat you insolently; put you at a distance; even put you out at the door without scruple. After all, I talked very cleverly, I said nothing but what was sensible, well turned, and discreet; and, upon my word, he advises me to be more circumspect in future. I will take good care of that! Eh! the mischief take it! I am a notary and a member of my chamber!--Pshaw! it was an ambassador’s fit of temper, nothing is sacred for people of that kind. To-morrow he shall explain what he meant by saying I had done nothing but blunder and talk nonsense in his house. I will ask him for an explanation—that is, I will ask him to explain my mistake. After all is said and done, I am in the wrong perhaps—Upon my word, it is very good of me to cudgel my brains like this. What business is it of mine?”

So the notary went home and laid the enigma before his spouse, with a complete account of the evening’s events.

And she replied, “My dear Crottat, His Excellency was perfectly right when he said you had done nothing but blunder and talk folly.”

“Why?”

“My dear, if I told you why, it would not prevent you from doing the same thing somewhere else to-morrow. I tell you again—talk of nothing but business when you go out; that is my advice to you.”

“If you will not tell me, I shall ask him to-morrow—”

“Why, dear me! the veriest noodle is careful to hide a thing of that kind, and do you suppose an ambassador will tell you about it? Really, Crottat, I have never known you so utterly devoid of common sense.”

“Thank you, my dear.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
One of Napoleon’s orderly staff-officers, called here the General or the Marquis, had come to spend the spring at Versailles. He had made a large fortune under the Restoration and, as his place at Court kept him near Paris, had rented a country house between the church and the barrier of Montreuil, on the road to the Avenue de Saint-Cloud.

Originally built as a retreat for some grand seigneur’s fleeting loves, the house had large grounds; gardens extended from the first houses of Montreuil to the thatched cottages by the barrier, so the owner could enjoy solitude with the city near at hand. Yet the whole front of the house, with the principal entrance, opened directly onto the street.

One winter evening the family were alone; the servants, gone to Versailles for a wedding, had overstayed. It was Christmas time. The clocks struck eleven; still no servants had returned. A deep, frosty silence lay over the countryside, broken only by a northeast wind and occasional far-off footsteps and a few leaves dancing in an eddy. The salon, however, was full of domestic warmth; women and children enjoyed the fireside.

The General lay buried in a huge armchair by the hearth, head slightly inclined, in indolent serenity. He watched his youngest, a boy of five, who refused a nightgown and cap, proud of his embroidered collar. The child romped with his sister Moïna, older by two years and mischievous; their laughter and play made the salon glow. The mother, around thirty-six and still beautiful, sat on the sofa with a tiny scarlet shoe in hand, enjoying the moment. Husband and wife exchanged silent looks of contentment.

The General’s bronzed, rugged face showed the battlefield’s lines and an inexpressible kindliness. Near a round table, a thirteen-year-old in lycéen uniform read the Arabian Nights, absorbed. Between him and the mother, Hélène sat at her tapestry frame. She was tall and beautiful, with abundant dark hair and a saintlike expression; yet a deep melancholy softened her gestures and a tremor ran through her hands. Once only did a sharp look pass between mother and daughter—cold and respectful on Hélène’s part, stern and threatening on the Marquise’s. An ominous mystery was growing between them.

“Come, Abel,” called the Marquise. “You must be put to bed.” The General scolded Gustave for still reading past ten and told him a story of Fox as a lesson on keeping one’s word. Gustave closed his book obediently. The General took Moïna, who soon slept on his breast.

Sudden hurrying footsteps and three knocks at the street door broke the quiet. A man was running. The General, fearing danger, seized pistols and a lantern and went down with Gustave following. A breathless voice begged to be let in. The man slipped into the porch and barred the door. The General held his pistol to the stranger’s breast and saw a medium-sized man in a fur-lined pelisse, hat slouched, with livid, quivering cheeks and burning eyes. The intruder demanded hospitality for two hours, threatening death if turned out. He wanted secrecy, a hiding place, and water.

The General, after a searching look and prompted by some sudden intuition, promised safety. The stranger thanked him and, in replying to questions, showed his hands steeped in blood. He claimed to have fought a duel; the General guessed otherwise. As they spoke, hoofbeats announced a troop of gendarmes; the General, hearing them approach, set the intruder in an attic room and locked him in, promising water and secrecy. He then came down to confront the visitors: the gendarmes sought a man fleeing toward the barrier.

A corporal asked if anyone had run past; the General, uneasy, denied it. The corporal, in the saddle, said Baron de Mauny had been murdered with an axe and the criminal was being pursued. The General, shocked, learned the murderer had left valuables untouched. The gendarmes tore away; the servants arrived later, having been delayed by the police. The General, chastened, sent them all to bed.

While the General was gone, the Marquise, seeing the key on the mantel, urged Hélène to go upstairs and see who was in the attic. Hélène, trembling with agitation at the thought of being ordered, took the key. Fear and inner turmoil crowded upon her as she climbed. When she opened the attic door, the murderer—silent, motionless, with a fierce and strange presence—stood with his head bare, sweating, his eyes burning. He appeared at once dangerous and commanding; Hélène, sensitive to such impressions, felt a strange attraction.

“Monsieur...” she whispered. The man started, then, seeing a woman, refused pity or interference—he insisted on solitude and said he would not wash his blood-stained hands under the General’s roof. He forbade Hélène to stay and, with an imperious gesture, dismissed her. Yet his glance, quick and electric, struck her like revelation; she returned to the salon shaken but silent, and the General arrived soon after.

Time passed. At one, a light footstep came from the second flight and the murderer stepped into the salon. He reminded the General that the two hours were nearly over. The General was horrified to find a bloodstained murderer in his house and ordered him out; the Marquise screamed. Hélène looked as if she had been waiting for this moment; she met the stranger’s eyes and seemed to see in him a judgment she shared. The stranger said he had acted as judge where man’s justice failed; he absolved himself in a manner.

Then, to everyone’s astonishment, Hélène whispered something to her mother. The Marquise cried out. Hélène announced she would go with the man. She had been upstairs; it was her first meeting with him, she declared. The General and Marquise were outraged and incredulous. The stranger, watching, smiled with an irresistible, magnetic power; both parents felt benumbed and saw their wills fail. The General drew Hélène aside and begged her to confess any weakness so he might spare her; she replied simply that she was in love with no one, yet she believed in this man. She refused to be driven by jealousy or folly; if she must live under some man’s protection, she chose him.

The Marquise pleaded: a man abhorred by the world could not be fit to take her daughter. Hélène answered that but for her she would be alone. The General, torn, threatened a convent; Hélène accepted, saying she would die there. The struggle became physical: the General took up a pistol, cocked it, pointed it at the intruder, but the stranger’s gaze relaxed him and his arm fell; the pistol slipped from his hand. At the click the General’s will broke. In exhaustion he told Hélène she was free, kissed his wife and daughter, and Hélène, embracing her mother, kissed her father’s hand and, with a last farewell to the sleeping children, vanished with the murderer.

The General cried out and roused the house, pulling bells, opening windows, calling for the police and the gendarmes, and setting his servants to search. He unleashed the dog and led the chase into the garden and countryside. Despite a frantic night search by gendarmes, servants, and neighbors, no trace of the fugitives or the dog was found by seven in the morning. The General returned to the now-empty salon, exhausted and broken. He could not bear the sight of Hélène’s unfinished embroidery; he ordered the frame destroyed. That Christmas night, when his daughter had been stolen by the man who wielded a strange power over her, was to mark the family’s ruin.

Time passed. The Marquis’s fortune failed in stock-market ventures; he lost money trying to retrieve it, and, driven to desperation, left France. Six years went by with little news. He wrote once that he was returning just before Spain recognized the independence of the American Republics. One fine morning several French merchants, among them the Marquis, were on board a Spanish brig a few leagues from Bordeaux. The sea was calm, and the coast came into view. The Marquis, aged by worry, watched the horizon, anxious to reach land.

Far off a sail seemed to be following them persistently. The Spanish captain, Gomez, feared the vessel was the Parisian privateer Othello, famed for speed and ferocity. The stranger-ship closed; soon the brig’s crew mutinied and betrayed them. The privateer proved swift and expert. Cannon-shot warned the Saint-Ferdinand, and when the Othello grapples were thrown the privateer’s men boarded, bound crew and passengers, and began transferring plunder. The Saint-Ferdinand carried four million piastres, the merchants’ fortunes, and the General’s eleven hundred thousand francs. Panic seized the brig; the privateer crew, ruthless, began to throw certain captives overboard. The Spanish captain Gomez, defiant, was killed when the lieutenant ordered his murder.

The General, defiant, snatched a cutlass and attacked, but was overpowered. As he faced death at the gangway, he looked up and met the tawny eyes of the man who had stolen his daughter. Recognition passed between them. The privateer captain intervened. He set the General down, calling him Hélène’s father and forbade harm. The men cheered. The captain led the General to a cabin and flung open the door. There, transformed by the tropics, was Hélène.

She was almost unrecognizable: the tropic sun had given warmth to her complexion, and a majestic air softened her features. Her hair fell in large curls; she wore magnificent Indian muslin and sat amid cashmere cushions on a Persian carpet, surrounded by four children playing at her feet. The cabin held pelts of luxury—Sèvres vases, pictures, a golden fruit plate. She was the queen of a floating household, both slave and sovereign.

“Father!” they cried, and embraced. Hélène explained she was the happiest woman alive. She spoke of her lover, husband, master—one whose soul she compared to the boundless sea—who had given her constant love, kindness, and safety for seven years. The captain’s devotion had made her queen on the seas. Her children, she said, were of the sea and danger and shared the life of their parents. She asked whether she was to return to France; she wished to see her mother and brothers if her husband would consent.

The captain entered, took the oldest boy, and sat. He spoke calmly about his life: when a man breaks the law in obedience to some higher necessity, conscience is a different measure. He denied plundering from booty and, in a generous gesture, gave the Marquis a million francs in banknotes. He suggested the General take a longboat to reach shore; his crew might sail on. Hélène, moved, gathered jewels and presents for her mother and family and asked the captain to let her father visit. He agreed to spare a little time, though he feared a French frigate might appear.

The parting was tender. Hélène kissed her father, embraced the children, and the captain, magnanimous or shrewd, permitted the General to go ashore in a longboat. The Saint-Ferdinand, set afire by men playing with a cask of rum, burned and sank; the Othello bore away with her prize clipped by smoke. The General watched Hélène’s white dress fluttering and saw her as an angel, a memory. He rowed to shore, reflecting on the strange reunion with his daughter now queenly and powerful in a lawless life.

Years later the Marquis died, having regained his fortunes and then been worn out by toil. In 1833 the Marquise took Moïna to a Pyrenean watering-place. On their way home a tragic incident occurred. One morning they heard a faint prolonged wail from the next room at the inn. The Marquise sent for the landlady. A poor stranger woman had come from Spain with a dying child and had taken the adjacent room; she had paid with a gold ring and refused to give her name. The Marquise, anxious to help, hurried upstairs. On entering, she recognized the suffering woman as her eldest daughter, Hélène. But Hélène, seeing her mother in widow’s black, shrieked and then sank back, stunned. Her child had just died in her arms.

Moïna and Pauline arrived with the doctor and landlady. The Marquise held her eldest’s ice-cold hand and looked at her with a mixture of reproach and forgiveness. Hélène, exhausted, blamed the life she had chosen: “There is no happiness outside the laws.” She questioned why she had not died at sixteen when she had once meant to take her life. In her last effort she pressed her dead child to her breast and died.

The Marquise, overwhelmed, lamented to Moïna: her eldest had meant to warn against the romantic, lawless life Hélène had embraced, and the warning had come too late.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
VI. THE OLD AGE OF A GUILTY MOTHER

It was one of the earliest June days of 1844. A lady of fifty or thereabouts, looking older than her years, paced a sunny path in the garden of a great mansion in the Rue Plumet, Paris. It was noon. She walked two or three times along the gently winding walk, careful not to lose sight of a certain row of windows; then she sat on a rustic bench. From there she could look through the railings along the boulevards to the dome of the Invalides above a forest of elms, and see her own grounds ending in the gray stone front of a fine hotel of the Faubourg Saint-Germain.

Silence lay over the neighboring gardens; day scarcely begins at noon in that aristocratic quarter. The elderly lady abroad at that hour was the Marquise d’Aiglemont, mother of Mme. de Saint-Héreen, to whom the great house belonged. The Marquise had made over the mansion and almost her whole fortune to her daughter, reserving only an annuity.

The Comtesse Moïna de Saint-Héreen was Mme. d’Aiglemont’s youngest and favorite child. The Marquise had sacrificed everything to marry her to the eldest son of one of France’s great houses. She had lost her sons—Gustave, Marquis d’Aiglemont, to cholera; Abel in Algeria. Gustave left a widow and children, but the dowager’s affection for her sons had been only moderate and for the next generation decidedly tepid. Having settled her dead children’s fortunes, she devoted her savings and property to Moïna.

Moïna, beautiful and fascinating from childhood, inspired in her mother an instinctive, involuntary, and intense love. The springs of the Marquise’s life lay in that young heart. Mme. d’Aiglemont had lost an eldest daughter under mysterious circumstances and a little boy of five to an accident; but her cherished child remained, and she read Heaven’s will in that fact. To others her partiality might seem shallow; yet Paris moved on and excused her. She rarely went into society, and those who knew her regarded her as kind and devoted. Her having given her property to Moïna was held up as an admirable example of maternal self-sacrifice.

“A marquise who lives in her daughter” some said, but conceded she had her comforts: a carriage, visits, and attendance at her daughter’s salons. A few mockers observed she was kept from the Italiens by the Countess’ box being full of young butterflies. Others noted the Marquise saw her daughter when she dressed and sometimes at dinner. An elderly parasite once found the Marquise solitary and sad by her fireside; she smiled when asked and spoke of having had five children. Such gossip circulates, but the historian of manners must weigh assertions cautiously: who can truly judge hearts? Still, religious thought often rose in Mme. d’Aiglemont’s mind; age turns one to ideas of destiny and divine judgment.

She sat under the acacia’s dotted shadow, exhausted with thinking—long thoughts in which a lifetime unrolls before one who feels Death near. A poet might have noted the woman’s face: pale and cold even in bright sun, fixed and expressive of deeper trouble than mere age. It was one of those faces that set forth a whole drama—lines that told of passion, motherhood, extremes of joy and anguish. A young face hides much; an old face reveals all it has endured, carved by love and suffering into sublime melancholy. Mme. d’Aiglemont’s hair had been bleached by sorrow, yet she wore it with the taste of a woman of fashion; traces of former beauty remained in her forehead’s contour, but pain had withered her temples, hollowed her cheeks, empurpled her eyelids, and thinned her lashes. She moved with slow, self-contained gravity, shy from long habit of effacing herself before her daughter. She spoke seldom and in low tones, living within herself. Her look suggested tears that never fell—grief absorbed by the heart—and the symptoms of secret bruises that destroy the soul’s flowers, even maternal sentiment.

Words cannot fully reproduce such a portrait; painters have colors for these impressions. Her face spoke of a steady inward conflict between a mother’s long-suffering and human limitations. Sorrow, endured silently, had produced a morbid something; perhaps a disease, perhaps aneurism, was undermining Julie’s life. Two tears ran down her cheeks; she rose as if struck by some acute thought. She had doubtless reached a conclusion about Moïna’s future; foreseeing the troubles in store for her child, the sorrows of her life rose again. The key of her position lay in her daughter’s situation.

The Comte de Saint-Héreen had been away nearly six months on a political mission. During his absence the Countess, from giddiness or coquetry, amused herself by playing with the passion of a clever but heartless man—Alfred de Vandenesse—distracted with love and social ambition. Mme. d’Aiglemont, with experience of life, watched this flirtation and sensed only ruin if her daughter fell into the hands of an unscrupulous intriguer. She dreaded that Moïna would not heed her warnings; she knew she had no influence over that nature—iron for her, silken-soft for others. The Marquise despised Alfred, knowing his attentions were a game of advantage.

Worse, Mme. d’Aiglemont was intimate with the Marquis de Vandenesse, Alfred’s father; this respectable friendship excused the son’s constant presence in the house. Even if she braced herself to denounce him, she foresaw failure—Alfred corrupt, Moïna clever; the revelation would be treated as maternal strategy and humiliate her. She had built her prison walls with her own hands; she must behold the ruin of the life she loved more than her own. What words can describe such anguish?

She waited for Moïna to rise with the impatience and sick dread of a doomed man longing to be done with life. Perhaps the certain failure of any attempt to move her daughter was less dreadful than the fear of a cutting word; thus courage ebbed. A mother’s love is such that it endures until death or it finds escape in religion or another love. Since rising that morning, memories had called up slight things that mark a life—gestures, tones that rend a life in two. Everything told Mme. d’Aiglemont Alfred had destroyed her hold on Moïna, that the thought of her was now associated with duty, not gladness. Trifles, countless, had wounded her; she may have thought her daughter’s undutifulness a punishment and excused her in Heaven’s will so she could still adore the hand that struck.

Small domestic details sufficed to give an idea of the rest. The Marquise had grown deaf, but could never induce Moïna to raise her voice; once, when she asked a remark to be repeated, Moïna obeyed with ill grace; the Marquise never asked again. After that she came near to catch Moïna’s words, but the Countess was impatient. Once when Mme. d’Aiglemont said the Princesse de Cadignan had called, Moïna exclaimed, “Did she come to see you!” in a tone of surprised, well-bred contempt; the mother rose smiling and wept alone. Well-bred people, especially women, betray feelings by imperceptible touches; such bruises vibrate in an old heart.

Overcome by memories, Mme. d’Aiglemont recalled one of those tiny stings so sharp she had never felt all the contempt lurking under smiles. At the sound of shutters opening at her daughter’s windows she dried her tears and hastened under the railings; the shutters were hastily closed.

“Moïna, is it you?” she asked.

No answer. She entered the house.

“Mme. la Comtesse is in the little drawing-room,” said the maid.

The Countess sat on the sofa in a loose morning-gown, hair disordered under a tossed cap, feet in slippers, the key of her bedroom at her girdle. Her face, aglow with color, showed traces of stormy thought.

“What makes people come in!” she cried, then, seeing her mother: “Oh! it is you, mother,” she interrupted with a preoccupied look.

“Yes, child; it is your mother—”

Something in the Marquise’s tone turned the words into an outpouring of the heart. The Countess was impressed, turning towards her with uneasiness and some remorse. The Marquise closed the door.

“It is my duty, my child, to warn you in one of the most serious crises in the lives of women; you may have reached it unconsciously. I speak as a friend rather than as a mother. When you married you gained freedom of action; you are accountable to your husband now; but I asserted my authority so little—perhaps wrongly—that I think I have a right to expect you to listen to me, for once, in a critical position when you need counsel. Bear in mind, Moïna, that you are married to a man of high ability, a man of whom you may well be proud, a man who—”

“I know what you are going to say, mother!” Moïna broke in petulantly. “I am to be lectured about Alfred—”

“Moïna,” the Marquise said gravely, struggling with tears, “you would not guess at once if you did not feel—”

“What?” asked Moïna almost haughtily. “Why, really, mother—”

Mme. d’Aiglemont summoned her strength. “Moïna,” she said, “you must attend carefully to this that I ought to tell you—”

“I am attending,” returned the Countess, folding her arms and affecting insolent submission. “Permit me, mother, to ring for Pauline,” she added; “I will send her away first.”

She rang the bell.

“My dear child, Pauline cannot possibly hear—”

“Mamma,” interrupted Moïna with unusual gravity, “I must—”

She stopped; Pauline herself appeared.

“Pauline, go yourself to Baudran’s, and ask why my hat has not yet been sent.”

Then the Countess sat and scrutinized her mother. The Marquise, with a swelling heart and dry eyes, in painful agitation that only a mother can fully understand, began to open Moïna’s eyes to the risk she ran. But either Moïna felt hurt at her mother’s suspicions of the Marquis de Vandenesse’s son, or she was seized with a sudden fit of levity. She took a pause.

“Mamma, I thought you were only jealous of the father—” she said with a forced laugh.

Mme. d’Aiglemont shut her eyes and bent her head at the words, with a faint, almost inaudible sigh. She looked up as if to appeal to God at life’s crises; then she looked at her daughter, her eyes full of awful majesty and profound sorrow.

“My child,” she said, her voice hardly recognizable, “you have been less merciful to your mother than he against whom she sinned; less merciful than perhaps God Himself will be!”

She rose; at the door she turned; but Moïna’s face showed nothing but surprise. The Marquise went to the garden. Scarcely had she reached it when her strength failed; a violent pain struck her heart and she sank on a bench. Her eyes wandered over the path where she saw fresh marks—the gardener’s raking showed a man’s footprints distinctly. It was too late, then; the order given to Pauline made sense. With these torturing thoughts came a revelation more hateful than any before: the son of the Marquis had destroyed all respect for her in her daughter’s mind. The pain grew worse; she lost consciousness and sat like one asleep on the seat.

The Countess, left to herself, thought her mother had given a shrewd home-thrust; a kiss and a few attentions that evening would set all right. A shrill cry came from the garden. Pauline, not yet departed, called for help, holding the Marquise in her arms.

“Do not frighten my daughter!” were the last words the mother uttered.

Moïna saw them carry in a pale, lifeless form that yet struggled for breath, arms moving restlessly as if to speak; overcome by the sight she followed in silence and helped undress her mother and lay her on her bed. The burden of her fault was greater than she could bear. In that supreme hour she learned to know her mother—too late for reparation. She would have them leave her alone with her; when no one else remained, facing the hand that had always been so tender and now cold to her touch, she broke into weeping. Her tears roused the Marquise; she could still look at her darling; at the sound of sobbing, she smiled back. That smile taught the unnatural child that forgiveness is always to be found in a mother’s heart.

Servants on horseback were dispatched for the physician, surgeon, and Mme. d’Aiglemont’s grandchildren. Mme. d’Aiglemont the younger and her little sons arrived with the medical men, an impressive, silent, anxious group, joined by the servants. The young Marquise, hearing no sound, tapped gently at the door; that signal roused Moïna from her grief, and she flung open the door and stood before them. No words could speak more plainly than that disheveled figure with haggard eyes; before that living picture of remorse the rest were dumb. It was plain the Marquise’s feet were stretched out stark and stiff with death agony; Moïna, leaning against the doorframe, looking into their faces, spoke in a hollow voice:

“I have lost my mother!”

PARIS, 1828-1844.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Aiglemont, General, Marquis Victor d’
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket
       The Firm of Nucingen

     Bonaparte, Napoleon
       The Vendetta
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Colonel Chabert
       Domestic Peace
       The Seamy Side of History

     Camps, Madame Octave de (nee Cadignan)
       Madame Firmiani
       The Government Clerks
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Member for Arcis

     Chatillonest, De
       Modeste Mignon

     Crottat, Alexandre
       Cesar Birotteau
       Colonel Chabert
       A Start in Life
       Cousin Pons

     Desroches (son)
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Colonel Chabert
       A Start in Life
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Government Clerks
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Man of Business
       The Middle Classes

     Duroc, Gerard-Christophe-Michel
       The Gondreville Mystery

     Ronquerolles, Marquis de
       The Imaginary Mistress
       The Peasantry
       Ursule Mirouet
       Another Study of Woman
       The Thirteen
       The Member for Arcis

     Saint-Héreen, Comtesse Moïna de
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Member for Arcis

     Sérizy, Comtesse de
       A Start in Life
       The Thirteen
       Ursule Mirouet
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Another Study of Woman
       The Imaginary Mistress

     Vandenesse, Marquis Charles de
       A Start in Life
       A Daughter of Eve
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################