Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

THE LILY OF THE VALLEY

By Honore De Balzac

Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

DEDICATION

To Monsieur J. B. Nacquart, Member of the Royal Academy of Medicine.

Dear Doctor--Here is one of the most carefully hewn stones in the second course of the foundation of a literary edifice which I have slowly and laboriously constructed. I wish to inscribe your name upon it, as much to thank the man whose science once saved me as to honor the friend of my daily life.

De Balzac.

THE LILY OF THE VALLEY

ENVOI

Felix de Vandenesse to Madame la Comtesse Natalie de Manerville:

I yield to your wishes. It is the privilege of the women whom we love more than they love us to make the men who love them ignore the ordinary rules of common-sense. To smooth the frown upon their brow, to soften the pout upon their lips, what obstacles we miraculously overcome! We shed our blood, we risk our future!

You exact the history of my past life; here it is. But remember this, Natalie; in obeying you I crush under foot a reluctance hitherto unconquerable. Why are you jealous of the sudden reveries which overtake me in the midst of our happiness? Why show the pretty anger of a petted woman when silence grasps me? Could you not play upon the contradictions of my character without inquiring into the causes of them? Are there secrets in your heart which seek absolution through a knowledge of mine? Ah! Natalie, you have guessed mine; and it is better you should know the whole truth. Yes, my life is shadowed by a phantom; a word evokes it; it hovers vaguely above me and about me; within my soul are solemn memories, buried in its depths like those marine productions seen in calmest weather and which the storms of ocean cast in fragments on the shore.

The mental labor which the expression of ideas necessitates has revived the old, old feelings which give me so much pain when they come suddenly; and if in this confession of my past they break forth in a way that wounds you, remember that you threatened to punish me if I did not obey your wishes, and do not, therefore, punish my obedience. I would that this, my confidence, might increase your love.

Until we meet,

Felix.

CHAPTER I. TWO CHILDHOODS

To what genius fed on tears shall we some day owe that most touching of all elegies,--the tale of tortures borne silently by souls whose tender roots find stony ground in the domestic soil, whose earliest buds are torn apart by rancorous hands, whose flowers are touched by frost at the moment of their blossoming? What poet will sing the sorrows of the child whose lips must suck a bitter breast, whose smiles are checked by the cruel fire of a stern eye? The tale that tells of such poor hearts, oppressed by beings placed about them to promote the development of their natures, would contain the true history of my childhood.

What vanity could I have wounded,--I a child new-born? What moral or physical infirmity caused by mother’s coldness? Was I the child of duty, whose birth is a mere chance, or was I one whose very life was a reproach? Put to nurse in the country and forgotten by my family for over three years, I was treated with such indifference on my return to the parental roof that even the servants pitied me. I do not know to what feeling or happy accident I owed my rescue from this first neglect; as a child I was ignorant of it, as a man I have not discovered it. Far from easing my lot, my brother and my two sisters found amusement in making me suffer. The compact in virtue of which children hide each other’s peccadilloes, and which early teaches them the principles of honor, was null and void in my case; more than that, I was often punished for my brother’s faults, without being allowed to prove the injustice. The fawning spirit which seems instinctive in children taught my brother and sisters to join in the persecutions to which I was subjected, and thus keep in the good graces of a mother whom they feared as much as I. Was this partly the effect of a childish love of imitation; was it from a need of testing their powers; or was it simply through lack of pity? Perhaps these causes united to deprive me of the sweets of fraternal intercourse.

Disinherited of all affection, I could love nothing; yet nature had made me loving. If in many such hearts the crushed feelings turn to hatred, in mine they condensed and hollowed a depth from which, in after years, they gushed forth upon my life. In many characters the habit of trembling relaxes the fibres and begets fear, and fear ends in submission; hence, a weakness which emasculates a man, and makes him more or less a slave. But in my case these perpetual tortures led to the development of a certain strength, which increased through exercise and predisposed my spirit to the habit of moral resistance. Always in expectation of some new grief--as the martyrs expected some fresh blow--my whole being expressed, I doubt not, a sullen resignation which smothered the grace and gaiety of childhood, and gave me an appearance of idiocy which seemed to justify my mother’s threatening prophecies. The certainty of injustice prematurely roused my pride--that fruit of reason--and thus, no doubt, checked the evil tendencies which an education like mine encouraged.

Though my mother neglected me I was sometimes the object of her solicitude; she occasionally spoke of my education and seemed desirous of attending to it herself. Cold chills ran through me at such times when I thought of the torture a daily intercourse with her would inflict upon me. I blessed the neglect in which I lived, and rejoiced that I could stay alone in the garden and play with the pebbles and watch the insects and gaze into the blueness of the sky. Though my loneliness naturally led me to reverie, my liking for contemplation was first aroused by an incident which will give you an idea of my early troubles. So little notice was taken of me that the governess occasionally forgot to send me to bed. One evening I was peacefully crouching under a fig-tree, watching a star with that passion of curiosity which takes possession of a child’s mind, and to which my precocious melancholy gave a sort of sentimental intuition. My sisters were playing about and laughing; I heard their distant chatter like an accompaniment to my thoughts. After a while the noise ceased and darkness fell. My mother happened to notice my absence. To escape blame, our governess, a terrible Mademoiselle Caroline, worked upon my mother’s fears,--told her I had a horror of my home and would long ago have run away if she had not watched me; that I was not stupid but sullen; and that in all her experience of children she had never known one of so bad a disposition as mine. She pretended to search for me. I answered as soon as I was called, and she came to the fig-tree, where she very well knew I was. “What are you doing there?” she asked. “Watching a star.” “You were not watching a star,” said my mother, who was listening on her balcony; “children of your age know nothing of astronomy.” “Ah, madame,” cried Mademoiselle Caroline, “he has opened the faucet of the reservoir; the garden is inundated!” Then there was a general excitement. The fact was that my sisters had amused themselves by turning the cock to see the water flow, but a sudden spurt wet them all over and frightened them so much that they ran away without closing it. Accused and convicted of this piece of mischief and told that I lied when I denied it, I was severely punished. Worse than all, I was jeered at for my pretended love of the stars and forbidden to stay in the garden after dark.

Such tyrannical restraints intensify a passion in the hearts of children even more than in those of men; children think of nothing but the forbidden thing, which then becomes irresistibly attractive to them. I was often whipped for my star. Unable to confide in my kind, I told it all my troubles in that delicious inward prattle with which we stammer our first ideas, just as once we stammered our first words. At twelve years of age, long after I was at school, I still watched that star with indescribable delight,--so deep and lasting are the impressions we receive in the dawn of life.

My brother Charles, five years older than I and as handsome a boy as he now is a man, was the favorite of my father, the idol of my mother, and consequently the sovereign of the house. He was robust and well-made, and had a tutor. I, puny and even sickly, was sent at five years of age as a day pupil to a school in the town; taken in the morning and brought back at night by my father’s valet. I was sent with a scanty lunch, while my school-fellows brought plenty of good food. This trifling contrast between my privations and their prosperity made me suffer deeply. My comrades, nearly all belonging to the lower bourgeoisie, would show me their rillons and ask if I knew how they were made and where they were sold, and why it was that I never had any. They licked their lips as they talked of them; they inspected my lunch-basket, and finding nothing better than Olivet cheese or dried fruits, they plagued me with questions: “Is that all you have? have you really nothing else?”--speeches which made me realize the difference between my brother and myself.

This contrast between my own abandonment and the happiness of others nipped the roses of my childhood and blighted my budding youth. The first time that I, mistaking my comrades’ actions for generosity, put forth my hand to take the dainty I had so long coveted and which was now hypocritically held out to me, my tormentor pulled back his slice to the great delight of his comrades who were expecting that result. If noble and distinguished minds are, as we often find them, capable of vanity, can we blame the child who weeps when despised and jeered at? Under such a trial many boys would have turned into gluttons and cringing beggars. I fought to escape my persecutors. The courage of despair made me formidable; but I was hated, and thus had no protection against treachery. One evening as I left school I was struck in the back by a handful of small stones tied in a handkerchief. When the valet, who punished the perpetrator, told this to my mother she exclaimed: “That dreadful child! he will always be a torment to us.”

Finding that I inspired in my schoolmates the same repulsion that was felt for me by my family, I sank into a horrible distrust of myself. A second fall of snow checked the seeds that were germinating in my soul. The boys whom I most liked were notorious scamps; this fact roused my pride and I held aloof. Again I was shut up within myself and had no vent for the feelings with which my heart was full. The master of the school, observing that I was gloomy, disliked by my comrades, and always alone, confirmed the family verdict as to my sulky temper. As soon as I could read and write, my mother transferred me to Pont-le-Voy, a school in charge of Oratorians who took boys of my age into a form called the “class of the Latin steps” where dull lads with torpid brains were apt to linger.

There I remained eight years without seeing my family; living the life of a pariah,--partly for the following reason. I received but three francs a month pocket-money, a sum barely sufficient to buy the pens, ink, paper, knives, and rules which we were forced to supply ourselves. Unable to buy stilts or skipping-ropes, or any of the things that were used in the playground, I was driven out of the games; to gain admission on suffrage I should have had to toady the rich and flatter the strong of my division. My heart rose against either of these meannesses, which, however, most children readily employ. I lived under a tree, lost in dejected thought, or reading the books distributed to us monthly by the librarian. How many griefs were in the shadow of that solitude; what genuine anguish filled my neglected life! Imagine what my sore heart felt when, at the first distribution of prizes,--of which I obtained the two most valued, namely, for theme and for translation,--neither my father nor my mother was present in the theatre when I came forward to receive the awards amid general acclamations, although the building was filled with the relatives of all my comrades. Instead of kissing the distributor, according to custom, I burst into tears and threw myself on his breast. That night I burned my crowns in the stove. The parents of the other boys were in town for a whole week preceding the distribution of the prizes, and my comrades departed joyfully the next day; while I, whose father and mother were only a few miles distant, remained at the school with the “outremers,”--a name given to scholars whose families were in the colonies or in foreign countries.

You will notice throughout how my unhappiness increased in proportion as the social spheres on which I entered widened. God knows what efforts I made to weaken the decree which condemned me to live within myself! What hopes, long cherished with eagerness of soul, were doomed to perish in a day! To persuade my parents to come and see me, I wrote them letters full of feeling, too emphatically worded, it may be; but surely such letters ought not to have drawn upon me my mother’s reprimand, coupled with ironical reproaches for my style. Not discouraged even then, I implored the help of my sisters, to whom I always wrote on their birthdays and fete-days with the persistence of a neglected child; but it was all in vain. As the day for the distribution of prizes approached I redoubled my entreaties, and told of my expected triumphs. Misled by my parents’ silence, I expected them with a beating heart. I told my schoolfellows they were coming; and then, when the old porter’s step sounded in the corridors as he called my happy comrades one by one to receive their friends, I was sick with expectation. Never did that old man call my name!

One day, when I accused myself to my confessor of having cursed my life, he pointed to the skies, where grew, he said, the promised palm for the “Beati qui lugent” of the Saviour. From the period of my first communion I flung myself into the mysterious depths of prayer, attracted to religious ideas whose moral fairyland so fascinates young spirits. Burning with ardent faith, I prayed to God to renew in my behalf the miracles I had read of in martyrology. At five years of age I fled to my star; at twelve I took refuge in the sanctuary. My ecstasy brought dreams unspeakable, which fed my imagination, fostered my susceptibilities, and strengthened my thinking powers. I have often attributed those sublime visions to the guardian angel charged with moulding my spirit to its divine destiny; they endowed my soul with the faculty of seeing the inner soul of things; they prepared my heart for the magic craft which makes a man a poet when the fatal power is his to compare what he feels within him with reality,--the great things aimed for with the small things gained. Those visions wrote upon my brain a book in which I read that which I must voice; they laid upon my lips the coal of utterance.

My father having conceived some doubts as to the tendency of the Oratorian teachings, took me from Pont-le-Voy, and sent me to Paris to an institution in the Marais. I was then fifteen. When examined as to my capacity, I, who was in the rhetoric class at Pont-le-Voy, was pronounced worthy of the third class. The sufferings I had endured in my family and in school were continued under another form during my stay at the Lepitre Academy. My father gave me no money; I was to be fed, clothed, and stuffed with Latin and Greek, for a sum agreed on. During my school life I came in contact with over a thousand comrades; but I never met with such an instance of neglect and indifference as mine. Monsieur Lepitre, who was fanatically attached to the Bourbons, had had relations with my father at the time when all devoted royalists were endeavoring to bring about the escape of Marie Antoinette from the Temple. They had lately renewed acquaintance; and Monsieur Lepitre thought himself obliged to repair my father’s oversight, and to give me a small sum monthly. But not being authorized to do so, the amount was small indeed.

The Lepitre establishment was in the old Joyeuse mansion where, as in all seignorial houses, there was a porter’s lodge. During a recess, which preceded the hour when the man-of-all-work took us to the Charlemagne Lyceum, the well-to-do pupils used to breakfast with the porter, named Doisy. Monsieur Lepitre was either ignorant of the fact or he connived at this arrangement with Doisy, a regular smuggler whom it was the pupils’ interest to protect,--he being the secret guardian of their pranks, the safe confidant of their late returns and their intermediary for obtaining forbidden books. Breakfast on a cup of “cafe-au-lait” is an aristocratic habit, explained by the high prices to which colonial products rose under Napoleon. If the use of sugar and coffee was a luxury to our parents, with us it was the sign of self-conscious superiority. Doisy gave credit, for he reckoned on the sisters and aunts of the pupils, who made it a point of honor to pay their debts. I resisted the blandishments of his place for a long time. If my judges knew the strength of its seduction, the heroic efforts I made after stoicism, the repressed desires of my long resistance, they would pardon my final overthrow. But, child as I was, could I have the grandeur of soul that scorns the scorn of others? Moreover, I may have felt the promptings of several social vices whose power was increased by my longings.

About the end of the second year my father and mother came to Paris. My brother had written me the day of their arrival. He lived in Paris, but had never been to see me. My sisters, he said, were of the party; we were all to see Paris together. The first day we were to dine in the Palais-Royal, so as to be near the Theatre-Francais. In spite of the intoxication such a programme of unhoped-for delights excited, my joy was dampened by the wind of a coming storm, which those who are used to unhappiness apprehend instinctively. I was forced to own a debt of a hundred francs to the Sieur Doisy, who threatened to ask my parents himself for the money. I bethought me of making my brother the emissary of Doisy, the mouth-piece of my repentance and the mediator of pardon. My father inclined to forgiveness, but my mother was pitiless; her dark blue eye froze me; she fulminated cruel prophecies: “What should I be later if at seventeen years of age I committed such follies? Was I really a son of hers? Did I mean to ruin my family? Did I think myself the only child of the house? My brother Charles’s career, already begun, required large outlay, amply deserved by his conduct which did honor to the family, while mine would always disgrace it. Did I know nothing of the value of money, and what I cost them? Of what use were coffee and sugar to my education? Such conduct was the first step into all the vices.”

After enduring the shock of this torrent which rasped my soul, I was sent back to school in charge of my brother. I lost the dinner at the Freres Provencaux, and was deprived of seeing Talma in Britannicus. Such was my first interview with my mother after a separation of twelve years.

When I had finished school my father left me under the guardianship of Monsieur Lepitre. I was to study the higher mathematics, follow a course of law for one year, and begin philosophy. Allowed to study in my own room and released from the classes, I expected a truce with trouble. But, in spite of my nineteen years, perhaps because of them, my father persisted in the system which had sent me to school without food, to an academy without pocket-money, and had driven me into debt to Doisy. Very little money was allowed to me, and what can you do in Paris without money? Moreover, my freedom was carefully chained up. Monsieur Lepitre sent me to the law school accompanied by a man-of-all-work who handed me over to the professor and fetched me home again. A young girl would have been treated with less precaution than my mother’s fears insisted on for me. Paris alarmed my parents, and justly. Students are secretly engaged in the same occupation which fills the minds of young ladies in their boarding-schools. Do what you will, nothing can prevent the latter from talking of lovers, or the former of women. But in Paris, and especially at this particular time, such talk among young lads was influenced by the oriental and sultanic atmosphere and customs of the Palais-Royal.

The Palais-Royal was an Eldorado of love where the ingots melted away in coin; there virgin doubts were over; there curiosity was appeased. The Palais-Royal and I were two asymptotes bearing one towards the other, yet unable to meet. Fate miscarried all my attempts. My father had presented me to one of my aunts who lived in the Ile St. Louis. With her I was to dine on Sundays and Thursdays, escorted to the house by either Monsieur or Madame Lepitre, who went out themselves on those days and were to call for me on their way home. Singular amusement for a young lad! My aunt, the Marquise de Listomere, was a great lady, of ceremonious habits, who would never have dreamed of offering me money. Old as a cathedral, painted like a miniature, sumptuous in dress, she lived in her great house as though Louis XV. were not dead, and saw none but old women and men of a past day,--a fossil society which made me think I was in a graveyard. No one spoke to me and I had not the courage to speak first. Cold and alien looks made me ashamed of my youth, which seemed to annoy them. I counted on this indifference to aid me in certain plans; I was resolved to escape some day directly after dinner and rush to the Palais-Royal. Once seated at whist my aunt would pay no attention to me. Jean, the footman, cared little for Monsieur Lepitre and would have aided me; but on the day I chose for my adventure that luckless dinner was longer than usual,--either because the jaws employed were worn out or the false teeth more imperfect. At last, between eight and nine o’clock, I reached the staircase, my heart beating like that of Bianca Capello on the day of her flight; but when the porter pulled the cord I beheld in the street before me Monsieur Lepitre’s hackney-coach, and I heard his pursy voice demanding me!

Three times did fate interpose between the hell of the Palais-Royal and the heaven of my youth. On the day when I, ashamed at twenty years of age of my own ignorance, determined to risk all dangers to put an end to it, at the very moment when I was about to run away from Monsieur Lepitre as he got into the coach,--a difficult process, for he was as fat as Louis XVIII. and club-footed,--well, can you believe it, my mother arrived in a post-chaise! Her glance arrested me; I stood still, like a bird before a snake. What fate had brought her there? The simplest thing in the world. Napoleon was then making his last efforts. My father, who foresaw the return of the Bourbons, had come to Paris with my mother to advise my brother, who was employed in the imperial diplomatic service. My mother was to take me back with her, out of the way of dangers which seemed, to those who followed the march of events intelligently, to threaten the capital. In a few minutes, as it were, I was taken out of Paris, at the very moment when my life there was about to become fatal to me.

The tortures of imagination excited by repressed desires, the weariness of a life depressed by constant privations had driven me to study, just as men, weary of fate, confine themselves in a cloister. To me, study had become a passion, which might even be fatal to my health by imprisoning me at a period of life when young men ought to yield to the bewitching activities of their springtide youth.

This slight sketch of my boyhood, in which you, Natalie, can readily perceive innumerable songs of woe, was needful to explain to you its influence on my future life. At twenty years of age, and affected by many morbid elements, I was still small and thin and pale. My soul, filled with the will to do, struggled with a body that seemed weakly, but which, in the words of an old physician at Tours, was undergoing its final fusion into a temperament of iron. Child in body and old in mind, I had read and thought so much that I knew life metaphysically at its highest reaches at the moment when I was about to enter the tortuous difficulties of its defiles and the sandy roads of its plains. A strange chance had held me long in that delightful period when the soul awakes to its first tumults, to its desires for joy, and the savor of life is fresh. I stood in the period between puberty and manhood,--the one prolonged by my excessive study, the other tardily developing its living shoots. No young man was ever more thoroughly prepared to feel and to love. To understand my history, let your mind dwell on that pure time of youth when the mouth is innocent of falsehood; when the glance of the eye is honest, though veiled by lids which droop from timidity contradicting desire; when the soul bends not to worldly Jesuitism, and the heart throbs as violently from trepidation as from the generous impulses of young emotion.

I need say nothing of the journey I made with my mother from Paris to Tours. The coldness of her behavior repressed me. At each relay I tried to speak; but a look, a word from her frightened away the speeches I had been meditating. At Orleans, where we had passed the night, my mother complained of my silence. I threw myself at her feet and clasped her knees; with tears I opened my heart. I tried to touch hers by the eloquence of my hungry love in accents that might have moved a stepmother. She replied that I was playing comedy. I complained that she had abandoned me. She called me an unnatural child. My whole nature was so wrung that at Blois I went upon the bridge to drown myself in the Loire. The height of the parapet prevented my suicide.

When I reached home, my two sisters, who did not know me, showed more surprise than tenderness. Afterwards, however, they seemed, by comparison, to be full of kindness towards me. I was given a room on the third story. You will understand the extent of my hardships when I tell you that my mother left me, a young man of twenty, without other linen than my miserable school outfit, or any other outside clothes than those I had long worn in Paris. If I ran from one end of the room to the other to pick up her handkerchief, she took it with the cold thanks a lady gives to her footman. Driven to watch her to find if there were any soft spot where I could fasten the rootlets of affection, I came to see her as she was,--a tall, spare woman, given to cards, egotistical and insolent, like all the Listomeres, who count insolence as part of their dowry. She saw nothing in life except duties to be fulfilled. All cold women whom I have known made, as she did, a religion of duty; she received our homage as a priest receives the incense of the mass. My elder brother appeared to absorb the trifling sentiment of maternity which was in her nature. She stabbed us constantly with her sharp irony,--the weapon of those who have no heart,--and which she used against us, who could make her no reply.

Notwithstanding these thorny hindrances, the instinctive sentiments have so many roots, the religious fear inspired by a mother whom it is dangerous to displease holds by so many threads, that the sublime mistake--if I may so call it--of our love for our mother lasted until the day, much later in our lives, when we judged her finally. This terrible despotism drove from my mind all thoughts of the voluptuous enjoyments I had dreamed of finding at Tours. In despair I took refuge in my father’s library, where I set myself to read every book I did not know. These long periods of hard study saved me from contact with my mother; but they aggravated the dangers of my moral condition. Sometimes my eldest sister--she who afterwards married our cousin, the Marquis de Listomere--tried to comfort me, without, however, being able to calm the irritation to which I was a victim. I desired to die.

Great events, of which I knew nothing, were then in preparation. The Duc d’Angouleme, who had left Bordeaux to join Louis XVIII. in Paris, was received in every town through which he passed with ovations inspired by the enthusiasm felt throughout old France at the return of the Bourbons. Touraine was aroused for its legitimate princes; the town itself was in a flutter, every window decorated, the inhabitants in their Sunday clothes, a festival in preparation, and that nameless excitement in the air which intoxicates, and which gave me a strong desire to be present at the ball given by the duke. When I summoned courage to make this request of my mother, who was too ill to go herself, she became extremely angry. “Had I come from Congo?” she inquired. “How could I suppose that our family would not be represented at the ball? In the absence of my father and brother, of course it was my duty to be present. Had I no mother? Was she not always thinking of the welfare of her children?”

In a moment the semi-disinherited son had become a personage! I was more dumfounded by my importance than by the deluge of ironical reasoning with which my mother received my request. I questioned my sisters, and then discovered that my mother, who liked such theatrical plots, was already attending to my clothes. The tailors in Tours were fully occupied by the sudden demands of their regular customers, and my mother was forced to employ her usual seamstress, who--according to provincial custom--could do all kinds of sewing. A bottle-blue coat had been secretly made for me, after a fashion, and silk stockings and pumps provided; waistcoats were then worn short, so that I could wear one of my father’s; and for the first time in my life I had a shirt with a frill, the pleatings of which puffed out my chest and were gathered in to the knot of my cravat. When dressed in this apparel I looked so little like myself that my sister’s compliments nerved me to face all Touraine at the ball. But it was a bold enterprise. Thanks to my slimness I slipped into a tent set up in the gardens of the Papion house, and found a place close to the armchair in which the duke was seated. Instantly I was suffocated by the heat, and dazzled by the lights, the scarlet draperies, the gilded ornaments, the dresses, and the diamonds of the first public ball I had ever witnessed. I was pushed hither and thither by a mass of men and women, who hustled each other in a cloud of dust. The brazen clash of military music was drowned in the hurrahs and acclamations of “Long live the Duc d’Angouleme! Long live the King! Long live the Bourbons!” The ball was an outburst of pent-up enthusiasm, where each man endeavored to outdo the rest in his fierce haste to worship the rising sun,--an exhibition of partisan greed which left me unmoved, or rather, it disgusted me and drove me back within myself.

Swept onward like a straw in the whirlwind, I was seized with a childish desire to be the Duc d’Angouleme himself, to be one of these princes parading before an awed assemblage. This silly fancy of a Tourangean lad roused an ambition to which my nature and the surrounding circumstances lent dignity. Who would not envy such worship?--a magnificent repetition of which I saw a few months later, when all Paris rushed to the feet of the Emperor on his return from Elba. The sense of this dominion exercised over the masses, whose feelings and whose very life are thus merged into one soul, dedicated me then and thenceforth to glory, that priestess who slaughters the Frenchmen of to-day as the Druidess once sacrificed the Gauls.

Suddenly I met the woman who was destined to spur these ambitious desires and to crown them by sending me into the heart of royalty. Too timid to ask any one to dance,--fearing, moreover, to confuse the figures,--I naturally became very awkward, and did not know what to do with my arms and legs. Just as I was suffering severely from the pressure of the crowd an officer stepped on my feet, swollen by the new leather of my shoes as well as by the heat. This disgusted me with the whole affair. It was impossible to get away; but I took refuge in a corner of a room at the end of an empty bench, where I sat with fixed eyes, motionless and sullen. Misled by my puny appearance, a woman--taking me for a sleepy child--slid softly into the place beside me, with the motion of a bird as she drops upon her nest. Instantly I breathed the woman-atmosphere, which irradiated my soul as, in after days, oriental poesy has shone there. I looked at my neighbor, and was more dazzled by that vision than I had been by the scene of the fete.

If you have understood this history of my early life you will guess the feelings which now welled up within me. My eyes rested suddenly on white, rounded shoulders where I would fain have laid my head,--shoulders faintly rosy, which seemed to blush as if uncovered for the first time; modest shoulders, that possessed a soul, and reflected light from their satin surface as from a silken texture. These shoulders were parted by a line along which my eyes wandered. I raised myself to see the bust and was spell-bound by the beauty of the bosom, chastely covered with gauze, where blue-veined globes of perfect outline were softly hidden in waves of lace. The slightest details of the head were each and all enchantments which awakened infinite delights within me; the brilliancy of the hair laid smoothly above a neck as soft and velvety as a child’s, the white lines drawn by the comb where my imagination ran as along a dewy path,--all these things put me, as it were, beside myself. Glancing round to be sure that no one saw me, I threw myself upon those shoulders as a child upon the breast of its mother, kissing them as I laid my head there. The woman uttered a piercing cry, which the noise of the music drowned; she turned, saw me, and exclaimed, “Monsieur!” Ah! had she said, “My little lad, what possesses you?” I might have killed her; but at the word “Monsieur!” hot tears fell from my eyes. I was petrified by a glance of saintly anger, by a noble face crowned with a diadem of golden hair in harmony with the shoulders I adored. The crimson of offended modesty glowed on her cheeks, though already it was appeased by the pardoning instinct of a woman who comprehends a frenzy which she inspires, and divines the infinite adoration of those repentant tears. She moved away with the step and carriage of a queen.

I then felt the ridicule of my position; for the first time I realized that I was dressed like the monkey of a barrel organ. I was ashamed. There I stood, stupefied,--tasting the fruit that I had stolen, conscious of the warmth upon my lips, repenting not, and following with my eyes the woman who had come down to me from heaven. Sick with the first fever of the heart I wandered through the rooms, unable to find my Unknown, until at last I went home to bed, another man.

A new soul, a soul with rainbow wings, had burst its chrysalis. Descending from the azure wastes where I had long admired her, my star had come to me a woman, with undiminished lustre and purity. I loved, knowing naught of love. How strange a thing, this first irruption of the keenest human emotion in the heart of a man! I had seen pretty women in other places, but none had made the slightest impression upon me. Can there be an appointed hour, a conjunction of stars, a union of circumstances, a certain woman among all others to awaken an exclusive passion at the period of life when love includes the whole sex?

The thought that my Elect lived in Touraine made the air I breathed delicious; the blue of the sky seemed bluer than I had ever yet seen it. I raved internally, but externally I was seriously ill, and my mother had fears, not unmingled with remorse. Like animals who know when danger is near, I hid myself away in the garden to think of the kiss that I had stolen. A few days after this memorable ball my mother attributed my neglect of study, my indifference to her tyrannical looks and sarcasms, and my gloomy behavior to the condition of my health. The country, that perpetual remedy for ills that doctors cannot cure, seemed to her the best means of bringing me out of my apathy. She decided that I should spend a few weeks at Frapesle, a chateau on the Indre midway between Montbazon and Azay-le-Rideau, which belonged to a friend of hers, to whom, no doubt, she gave private instructions.

By the day when I thus for the first time gained my liberty I had swum so vigorously in Love’s ocean that I had well-nigh crossed it. I knew nothing of mine unknown lady, neither her name, nor where to find her; to whom, indeed, could I speak of her? My sensitive nature so exaggerated the inexplicable fears which beset all youthful hearts at the first approach of love that I began with the melancholy which often ends a hopeless passion. I asked nothing better than to roam about the country, to come and go and live in the fields. With the courage of a child that fears no failure, in which there is something really chivalrous, I determined to search every chateau in Touraine, travelling on foot, and saying to myself as each old tower came in sight, “She is there!”

Accordingly, of a Thursday morning I left Tours by the barrier of Saint-Eloy, crossed the bridges of Saint-Sauveur, reached Poncher whose every house I examined, and took the road to Chinon. For the first time in my life I could sit down under a tree or walk fast or slow as I pleased without being dictated to by any one. To a poor lad crushed under all sorts of despotism (which more or less does weigh upon all youth) the first employment of freedom, even though it be expended upon nothing, lifts the soul with irrepressible buoyancy. Several reasons combined to make that day one of enchantment. During my school years I had never been taken to walk more than two or three miles from a city; yet there remained in my mind among the earliest recollections of my childhood that feeling for the beautiful which the scenery about Tours inspires. Though quite untaught as to the poetry of such a landscape, I was, unknown to myself, critical upon it, like those who imagine the ideal of art without knowing anything of its practice.

To reach the chateau of Frapesle, foot-passengers, or those on horseback, shorten the way by crossing the Charlemagne moors,--uncultivated tracts of land lying on the summit of the plateau which separates the valley of the Cher from that of the Indre, and over which there is a cross-road leading to Champy. These moors are flat and sandy, and for more than three miles are dreary enough until you reach, through a clump of woods, the road to Sache, the name of the township in which Frapesle stands. This road, which joins that of Chinon beyond Ballan, skirts an undulating plain to the little hamlet of Artanne. Here we come upon a valley, which begins at Montbazon, ends at the Loire, and seems to rise and fall,--to bound, as it were,--beneath the chateaus placed on its double hillsides,--a splendid emerald cup, in the depths of which flow the serpentine lines of the river Indre. I gazed at this scene with ineffable delight, for which the gloomy moor-land and the fatigue of the sandy walk had prepared me.

“If that woman, the flower of her sex, does indeed inhabit this earth, she is here, on this spot.”

Thus musing, I leaned against a walnut-tree, beneath which I have rested from that day to this whenever I return to my dear valley. Beneath that tree, the confidant of my thoughts, I ask myself what changes there are in me since last I stood there.

My heart deceived me not--she lived there; the first castle that I saw on the slope of a hill was the dwelling that held her. As I sat beneath my nut-tree, the mid-day sun was sparkling on the slates of her roof and the panes of her windows. Her cambric dress made the white line which I saw among the vines of an arbor. She was, as you know already without as yet knowing anything, the Lily of this valley, where she grew for heaven, filling it with the fragrance of her virtues. Love, infinite love, without other sustenance than the vision, dimly seen, of which my soul was full, was there, expressed to me by that long ribbon of water flowing in the sunshine between the grass-green banks, by the lines of the poplars adorning with their mobile laces that vale of love, by the oak-woods coming down between the vineyards to the shore, which the river curved and rounded as it chose, and by those dim varying horizons as they fled confusedly away.

If you would see nature beautiful and virgin as a bride, go there of a spring morning. If you would still the bleeding wounds of your heart, return in the last days of autumn. In the spring, Love beats his wings beneath the broad blue sky; in the autumn, we think of those who are no more. The lungs diseased breathe in a blessed purity; the eyes will rest on golden copses which impart to the soul their peaceful stillness. At this moment, when I stood there for the first time, the mills upon the brooksides gave a voice to the quivering valley; the poplars were laughing as they swayed; not a cloud was in the sky; the birds sang, the crickets chirped,--all was melody. Do not ask me again why I love Touraine. I love it, not as we love our cradle, not as we love the oasis in a desert; I love it as an artist loves art; I love it less than I love you; but without Touraine, perhaps I might not now be living.

Without knowing why, my eyes reverted ever to that white spot, to the woman who shone in that garden as the bell of a convolvulus shines amid the underbrush, and wilts if touched. Moved to the soul, I descended the slope and soon saw a village, which the superabounding poetry that filled my heart made me fancy without an equal. Imagine three mills placed among islands of graceful outline crowned with groves of trees and rising from a field of water,--for what other name can I give to that aquatic vegetation, so verdant, so finely colored, which carpeted the river, rose above its surface and undulated upon it, yielding to its caprices and swaying to the turmoil of the water when the mill-wheels lashed it. Here and there were mounds of gravel, against which the wavelets broke in fringes that shimmered in the sunlight. Amaryllis, water-lilies, reeds, and phloxes decorated the banks with their glorious tapestry. A trembling bridge of rotten planks, the abutments swathed with flowers, and the hand-rails green with perennials and velvet mosses drooping to the river but not falling to it; mouldering boats, fishing-nets; the monotonous sing-song of a shepherd; ducks paddling among the islands or preening on the “jard,”--a name given to the coarse sand which the Loire brings down; the millers, with their caps over one ear, busily loading their mules,--all these details made the scene before me one of primitive simplicity. Imagine, also, beyond the bridge two or three farm-houses, a dove-cote, turtle-doves, thirty or more dilapidated cottages, separated by gardens, by hedges of honeysuckle, clematis, and jasmine; a dunghill beside each door, and cocks and hens about the road. Such is the village of Pont-de-Ruan, a picturesque little hamlet leading up to an old church full of character, a church of the days of the Crusades, such a one as painters desire for their pictures. Surround this scene with ancient walnut-trees and slim young poplars with their pale-gold leaves; dot graceful buildings here and there along the grassy slopes where sight is lost beneath the vaporous, warm sky, and you will have some idea of one of the points of view of this most lovely region.

I followed the road to Sache along the left bank of the river, noticing carefully the details of the hills on the opposite shore. At length I reached a park embellished with centennial trees, which I knew to be that of Frapesle. I arrived just as the bell was ringing for breakfast. After the meal, my host, who little suspected that I had walked from Tours, carried me over his estate, from the borders of which I saw the valley on all sides under its many aspects,--here through a vista, there to its broad extent; often my eyes were drawn to the horizon along the golden blade of the Loire, where the sails made fantastic figures among the currents as they flew before the wind. As we mounted a crest I came in sight of the chateau d’Azay, like a diamond of many facets in a setting of the Indre, standing on wooden piles concealed by flowers. Farther on, in a hollow, I saw the romantic masses of the chateau of Sache, a sad retreat though full of harmony; too sad for the superficial, but dear to a poet with a soul in pain. I, too, came to love its silence, its great gnarled trees, and the nameless mysterious influence of its solitary valley. But now, each time that we reached an opening towards the neighboring slope which gave to view the pretty castle I had first noticed in the morning, I stopped to look at it with pleasure.

“Hey!” said my host, reading in my eyes the sparkling desires which youth so ingenuously betrays, “so you scent from afar a pretty woman as a dog scents game!”

I did not like the speech, but I asked the name of the castle and of its owner.

“It is Clochegourde,” he replied; “a pretty house belonging to the Comte de Mortsauf, the head of an historic family in Touraine, whose fortune dates from the days of Louis XI., and whose name tells the story to which they owe their arms and their distinction. Monsieur de Mortsauf is descended from a man who survived the gallows. The family bear: Or, a cross potent and counter-potent sable, charged with a fleur-de-lis or; and ‘Dieu saulve le Roi nostre Sire,’ for motto. The count settled here after the return of the emigration. The estate belongs to his wife, a demoiseille de Lenoncourt, of the house of Lenoncourt-Givry which is now dying out. Madame de Mortsauf is an only daughter. The limited fortune of the family contrasts strangely with the distinction of their names; either from pride, or, possibly, from necessity, they never leave Clochegourde and see no company. Until now their attachment to the Bourbons explained this retirement, but the return of the king has not changed their way of living. When I came to reside here last year I paid them a visit of courtesy; they returned it and invited us to dinner; the winter separated us for some months, and political events kept me away from Frapesle until recently. Madame de Mortsauf is a woman who would hold the highest position wherever she might be.”

“Does she often come to Tours?”

“She never goes there. However,” he added, correcting himself, “she did go there lately to the ball given to the Duc d’Angouleme, who was very gracious to her husband.”

“It was she!” I exclaimed.

“She! who?”

“A woman with beautiful shoulders.”

“You will meet a great many women with beautiful shoulders in Touraine,” he said, laughing. “But if you are not tired we can cross the river and call at Clochegourde and you shall renew acquaintance with those particular shoulders.”

I agreed, not without a blush of shame and pleasure. About four o’clock we reached the little chateau on which my eyes had fastened from the first. The building, which is finely effective in the landscape, is in reality very modest. It has five windows on the front; those at each end of the facade, looking south, project about twelve feet,--an architectural device which gives the idea of two towers and adds grace to the structure. The middle window serves as a door from which you descend through a double portico into a terraced garden which joins the narrow strip of grass-land that skirts the Indre along its whole course. Though this meadow is separated from the lower terrace, which is shaded by a double line of acacias and Japanese ailanthus, by the country road, it nevertheless appears from the house to be a part of the garden, for the road is sunken and hemmed in on one side by the terrace, on the other side by a Norman hedge. The terraces being very well managed put enough distance between the house and the river to avoid the inconvenience of too great proximity to water, without losing the charms of it. Below the house are the stables, coach-house, green-houses, and kitchen, the various openings to which form an arcade. The roof is charmingly rounded at the angles, and bears mansarde windows with carved mullions and leaden finials on their gables. This roof, no doubt much neglected during the Revolution, is stained by a sort of mildew produced by lichens and the reddish moss which grows on houses exposed to the sun. The glass door of the portico is surmounted by a little tower which holds the bell, and on which is carved the escutcheon of the Blamont-Chauvry family, to which Madame de Mortsauf belonged, as follows: Gules, a pale vair, flanked quarterly by two hands clasped or, and two lances in chevron sable. The motto, “Voyez tous, nul ne touche!” struck me greatly. The supporters, a griffin and dragon gules, enchained or, made a pretty effect in the carving. The Revolution has damaged the ducal crown and the crest, which was a palm-tree vert with fruit or. Senart, the secretary of the committee of public safety was bailiff of Sache before 1781, which explains this destruction.

These arrangements give an elegant air to the little castle, dainty as a flower, which seems to scarcely rest upon the earth. Seen from the valley the ground-floor appears to be the first story; but on the other side it is on a level with a broad gravelled path leading to a grass-plot, on which are several flower-beds. To right and left are vineyards, orchards, and a few acres of tilled land planted with chestnut-trees which surround the house, the ground falling rapidly to the Indre, where other groups of trees of variegated shades of green, chosen by Nature herself, are spread along the shore. I admired these groups, so charmingly disposed, as we mounted the hilly road which borders Clochegourde; I breathed an atmosphere of happiness. Has the moral nature, like the physical nature, its own electrical communications and its rapid changes of temperature? My heart was beating at the approach of events then unrevealed which were to change it forever, just as animals grow livelier when foreseeing fine weather.

This day, so marked in my life, lacked no circumstance that was needed to solemnize it. Nature was adorned like a woman to meet her lover. My soul heard her voice for the first time; my eyes worshipped her, as fruitful, as varied as my imagination had pictured her in those school-dreams the influence of which I have tried in a few unskilful words to explain to you, for they were to me an Apocalypse in which my life was figuratively foretold; each event, fortunate or unfortunate, being mated to some one of these strange visions by ties known only to the soul.

We crossed a court-yard surrounded by buildings necessary for the farm work,--a barn, a wine-press, cow-sheds, and stables. Warned by the barking of the watch-dog, a servant came to meet us, saying that Monsieur le comte had gone to Azay in the morning but would soon return, and that Madame la comtesse was at home. My companion looked at me. I fairly trembled lest he should decline to see Madame de Mortsauf in her husband’s absence; but he told the man to announce us. With the eagerness of a child I rushed into the long antechamber which crosses the whole house.

“Come in, gentlemen,” said a golden voice.

Though Madame de Mortsauf had spoken only one word at the ball, I recognized her voice, which entered my soul and filled it as a ray of sunshine fills and gilds a prisoner’s dungeon. Thinking, suddenly, that she might remember my face, my first impulse was to fly; but it was too late,--she appeared in the doorway, and our eyes met. I know not which of us blushed deepest. Too much confused for immediate speech she returned to her seat at an embroidery frame while the servant placed two chairs, then she drew out her needle and counted some stitches, as if to explain her silence; after which she raised her head, gently yet proudly, in the direction of Monsieur de Chessel as she asked to what fortunate circumstance she owed his visit. Though curious to know the secret of my unexpected appearance, she looked at neither of us,--her eyes were fixed on the river; and yet you could have told by the way she listened that she was able to recognize, as the blind do, the agitations of a neighboring soul by the imperceptible inflexions of the voice.

Monsieur de Chessel gave my name and biography. I had lately arrived at Tours, where my parents had recalled me when the armies threatened Paris. A son of Touraine to whom Touraine was as yet unknown, she would find me a young man weakened by excessive study and sent to Frapesle to amuse himself; he had already shown me his estate, which I saw for the first time. I had just told him that I had walked from Tours to Frapesle, and fearing for my health--which was really delicate--he had stopped at Clochegourde to ask her to allow me to rest there. Monsieur de Chessel told the truth; but the accident seemed so forced that Madame de Mortsauf distrusted us. She gave me a cold, severe glance, under which my own eyelids fell, as much from a sense of humiliation as to hide the tears that rose beneath them. She saw the moisture on my forehead, and perhaps she guessed the tears; for she offered me the restoratives I needed, with a few kind and consoling words, which gave me back the power of speech. I blushed like a young girl, and in a voice as tremulous as that of an old man I thanked her and declined.

“All I ask,” I said, raising my eyes to hers, which mine now met for the second time in a glance as rapid as lightning,--“is to rest here. I am so crippled with fatigue I really cannot walk farther.”

“You must not doubt the hospitality of our beautiful Touraine,” she said; then, turning to my companion, she added: “You will give us the pleasure of your dining at Clochegourde?”

I threw such a look of entreaty at Monsieur de Chessel that he began the preliminaries of accepting the invitation, though it was given in a manner that seemed to expect a refusal. As a man of the world, he recognized these shades of meaning; but I, a young man without experience, believed so implicitly in the sincerity between word and thought of this beautiful woman that I was wholly astonished when my host said to me, after we reached home that evening, “I stayed because I saw you were dying to do so; but if you do not succeed in making it all right, I may find myself on bad terms with my neighbors.” That expression, “if you do not make it all right,” made me ponder the matter deeply. In other words, if I pleased Madame de Mortsauf, she would not be displeased with the man who introduced me to her. He evidently thought I had the power to please her; this in itself gave me that power, and corroborated my inward hope at a moment when it needed some outward succor.

“I am afraid it will be difficult,” he began; “Madame de Chessel expects us.”

“She has you every day,” replied the countess; “besides, we can send her word. Is she alone?”

“No, the Abbe de Quelus is there.”

“Well, then,” she said, rising to ring the bell, “you really must dine with us.”

This time Monsieur de Chessel thought her in earnest, and gave me a congratulatory look. As soon as I was sure of passing a whole evening under that roof I seemed to have eternity before me. For many miserable beings to-morrow is a word without meaning, and I was of the number who had no faith in it; when I was certain of a few hours of happiness I made them contain a whole lifetime of delight.

Madame de Mortsauf talked about local affairs, the harvest, the vintage, and other matters to which I was a total stranger. This usually argues either a want of breeding or great contempt for the stranger present who is thus shut out from the conversation, but in this case it was embarrassment. Though at first I thought she treated me as a child and I envied the man of thirty to whom she talked of serious matters which I could not comprehend, I came, a few months later, to understand how significant a woman’s silence often is, and how many thoughts a voluble conversation masks. At first I attempted to be at my ease and take part in it, then I perceived the advantages of my situation and gave myself up to the charm of listening to Madame de Mortsauf’s voice. The breath of her soul rose and fell among the syllables as sound is divided by the notes of a flute; it died away to the ear as it quickened the pulsation of the blood. Her way of uttering the terminations in “i” was like a bird’s song; the “ch” as she said it was a kiss, but the “t’s” were an echo of her heart’s despotism. She thus extended, without herself knowing that she did so, the meaning of her words, leading the soul of the listener into regions above this earth. Many a time I have continued a discussion I could easily have ended, many a time I have allowed myself to be unjustly scolded that I might listen to those harmonies of the human voice, that I might breathe the air of her soul as it left her lips, and strain to my soul that spoken light as I would fain have strained the speaker to my breast. A swallow’s song of joy it was when she was gay!--but when she spoke of her griefs, a swan’s voice calling to its mates!

Madame de Mortsauf’s inattention to my presence enabled me to examine her. My eyes rejoiced as they glided over the sweet speaker; they kissed her feet, they clasped her waist, they played with the ringlets of her hair. And yet I was a prey to terror, as all who, once in their lives, have experienced the illimitable joys of a true passion will understand. I feared she would detect me if I let my eyes rest upon the shoulder I had kissed, and the fear sharpened the temptation. I yielded, I looked, my eyes tore away the covering; I saw the mole which lay where the pretty line between the shoulders started, and which, ever since the ball, had sparkled in that twilight which seems the region of the sleep of youths whose imagination is ardent and whose life is chaste.

I can sketch for you the leading features which all eyes saw in Madame de Mortsauf; but no drawing, however correct, no color, however warm, can represent her to you. Her face was of those that require the unattainable artist, whose hand can paint the reflection of inward fires and render that luminous vapor which defies science and is not revealable by language--but which a lover sees. Her soft, fair hair often caused her much suffering, no doubt through sudden rushes of blood to the head. Her brow, round and prominent like that of Joconda, teemed with unuttered thoughts, restrained feelings--flowers drowning in bitter waters. The eyes, of a green tinge flecked with brown, were always wan; but if her children were in question, or if some keen condition of joy or suffering (rare in the lives of all resigned women) seized her, those eyes sent forth a subtile gleam as if from fires that were consuming her,--the gleam that wrung the tears from mine when she covered me with her contempt, and which sufficed to lower the boldest eyelid. A Grecian nose, designed it might be by Phidias, and united by its double arch to lips that were gracefully curved, spiritualized the face, which was oval with a skin of the texture of a white camellia colored with soft rose-tints upon the cheeks. Her plumpness did not detract from the grace of her figure nor from the rounded outlines which made her shape beautiful though well developed. You will understand the character of this perfection when I say that where the dazzling treasures which had so fascinated me joined the arm there was no crease or wrinkle. No hollow disfigured the base of her head, like those which make the necks of some women resemble trunks of trees; her muscles were not harshly defined, and everywhere the lines were rounded into curves as fugitive to the eye as to the pencil. A soft down faintly showed upon her cheeks and on the outline of her throat, catching the light which made it silken. Her little ears, perfect in shape, were, as she said herself, the ears of a mother and a slave. In after days, when our hearts were one, she would say to me, “Here comes Monsieur de Mortsauf”; and she was right, though I, whose hearing is remarkably acute, could hear nothing.

Her arms were beautiful. The curved fingers of the hand were long, and the flesh projected at the side beyond the finger-nails, like those of antique statues. I should displease you, I know, if you were not yourself an exception to my rule, when I say that flat waists should have the preference over round ones. The round waist is a sign of strength; but women thus formed are imperious, self-willed, and more voluptuous than tender. On the other hand, women with flat waists are devoted in soul, delicately perceptive, inclined to sadness, more truly woman than the other class. The flat waist is supple and yielding; the round waist is inflexible and jealous.

You now know how she was made. She had the foot of a well-bred woman,--the foot that walks little, is quickly tired, and delights the eye when it peeps beneath the dress. Though she was the mother of two children, I have never met any woman so truly a young girl as she. Her whole air was one of simplicity, joined to a certain bashful dreaminess which attracted others, just as a painter arrests our steps before a figure into which his genius has conveyed a world of sentiment. If you recall the pure, wild fragrance of the heath we gathered on our return from the Villa Diodati, the flower whose tints of black and rose you praised so warmly, you can fancy how this woman could be elegant though remote from the social world, natural in expression, fastidious in all things which became part of herself,--in short, like the heath of mingled colors. Her body had the freshness we admire in the unfolding leaf; her spirit the clear conciseness of the aboriginal mind; she was a child by feeling, grave through suffering, the mistress of a household, yet a maiden too. Therefore she charmed artlessly and unconsciously, by her way of sitting down or rising, of throwing in a word or keeping silence. Though habitually collected, watchful as the sentinel on whom the safety of others depends and who looks for danger, there were moments when smiles would wreathe her lips and betray the happy nature buried beneath the saddened bearing that was the outcome of her life. Her gift of attraction was mysterious. Instead of inspiring the gallant attentions which other women seek, she made men dream, letting them see her virginal nature of pure flame, her celestial visions, as we see the azure heavens through rifts in the clouds. This involuntary revelation of her being made others thoughtful. The rarity of her gestures, above all, the rarity of her glances--for, excepting her children, she seldom looked at any one--gave a strange solemnity to all she said and did when her words or actions seemed to her to compromise her dignity.

On this particular morning Madame de Mortsauf wore a rose-colored gown patterned in tiny stripes, a collar with a wide hem, a black belt, and little boots of the same hue. Her hair was simply twisted round her head, and held in place by a tortoise-shell comb. Such, my dear Natalie, is the imperfect sketch I promised you. But the constant emanation of her soul upon her family, that nurturing essence shed in floods around her as the sun emits its light, her inward nature, her cheerfulness on days serene, her resignation on stormy ones,--all those variations of expression by which character is displayed depend, like the effects in the sky, on unexpected and fugitive circumstances, which have no connection with each other except the background against which they rest, though all are necessarily mingled with the events of this history,--truly a household epic, as great to the eyes of a wise man as a tragedy to the eyes of the crowd, an epic in which you will feel an interest, not only for the part I took in it, but for the likeness that it bears to the destinies of so vast a number of women.

Everything at Clochegourde bore signs of a truly English cleanliness. The room in which the countess received us was panelled throughout and painted in two shades of gray. The mantelpiece was ornamented with a clock inserted in a block of mahogany and surmounted with a tazza, and two large vases of white porcelain with gold lines, which held bunches of Cape heather. A lamp was on a pier-table, and a backgammon board on legs before the fireplace. Two wide bands of cotton held back the white cambric curtains, which had no fringe. The furniture was covered with gray cotton bound with a green braid, and the tapestry on the countess’s frame told why the upholstery was thus covered. Such simplicity rose to grandeur. No apartment, among all that I have seen since, has given me such fertile, such teeming impressions as those that filled my mind in that salon of Clochegourde, calm and composed as the life of its mistress, where the conventual regularity of her occupations made itself felt. The greater part of my ideas in science or politics, even the boldest of them, were born in that room, as perfumes emanate from flowers; there grew the mysterious plant that cast upon my soul its fructifying pollen; there glowed the solar warmth which developed my good and shrivelled my evil qualities. Through the windows the eye took in the valley from the heights of Pont-de-Ruan to the chateau d’Azay, following the windings of the further shore, picturesquely varied by the towers of Frapesle, the church, the village, and the old manor-house of Sache, whose venerable pile looked down upon the meadows.

In harmony with this reposeful life, and without other excitements to emotion than those arising in the family, this scene conveyed to the soul its own serenity. If I had met her there for the first time, between the count and her two children, instead of seeing her resplendent in a ball dress, I should not have ravished that delirious kiss, which now filled me with remorse and with the fear of having lost the future of my love. No; in the gloom of my unhappy life I should have bent my knee and kissed the hem of her garment, wetting it with tears, and then I might have flung myself into the Indre. But having breathed the jasmine perfume of her skin and drunk the milk of that cup of love, my soul had acquired the knowledge and the hope of human joys; I would live and await the coming of happiness as the savage awaits his hour of vengeance; I longed to climb those trees, to creep among the vines, to float in the river; I wanted the companionship of night and its silence, I needed lassitude of body, I craved the heat of the sun to make the eating of the delicious apple into which I had bitten perfect. Had she asked of me the singing flower, the riches buried by the comrades of Morgan the destroyer, I would have sought them, to obtain those other riches and that mute flower for which I longed.

When my dream, the dream into which this first contemplation of my idol plunged me, came to an end and I heard her speaking of Monsieur de Mortsauf, the thought came that a woman must belong to her husband, and a raging curiosity possessed me to see the owner of this treasure. Two emotions filled my mind, hatred and fear,--hatred which allowed of no obstacles and measured all without shrinking, and a vague, but real fear of the struggle, of its issue, and above all of her.

“Here is Monsieur de Mortsauf,” she said.

I sprang to my feet like a startled horse. Though the movement was seen by Monsieur de Chessel and the countess, neither made any observation, for a diversion was effected at this moment by the entrance of a little girl, whom I took to be about six years old, who came in exclaiming, “Here’s papa!”

“Madeleine?” said her mother, gently.

The child at once held out her hand to Monsieur de Chessel, and looked attentively at me after making a little bow with an air of astonishment.

“Are you more satisfied about her health?” asked Monsieur de Chessel.

“She is better,” replied the countess, caressing the little head which was already nestling in her lap.

The next question of Monsieur de Chessel let me know that Madeleine was nine years old; I showed great surprise, and immediately the clouds gathered on the mother’s brow. My companion threw me a significant look,--one of those which form the education of men of the world. I had stumbled no doubt upon some maternal wound the covering of which should have been respected. The sickly child, whose eyes were pallid and whose skin was white as a porcelain vase with a light within it, would probably not have lived in the atmosphere of a city. Country air and her mother’s brooding care had kept the life in that frail body, delicate as a hot-house plant growing in a harsh and foreign climate. Though in nothing did she remind me of her mother, Madeleine seemed to have her soul, and that soul held her up. Her hair was scanty and black, her eyes and cheeks hollow, her arms thin, her chest narrow, showing a battle between life and death, a duel without truce in which the mother had so far been victorious. The child willed to live,--perhaps to spare her mother, for at times, when not observed, she fell into the attitude of a weeping-willow. You might have thought her a little gypsy dying of hunger, begging her way, exhausted but always brave and dressed up to play her part.

“Where have you left Jacques?” asked the countess, kissing the white line which parted the child’s hair into two bands that looked like a crow’s wings.

“He is coming with papa.”

Just then the count entered, holding his son by the hand. Jacques, the image of his sister, showed the same signs of weakness. Seeing these sickly children beside a mother so magnificently healthy it was impossible not to guess at the causes of the grief which clouded her brow and kept her silent on a subject she could take to God only. As he bowed, Monsieur de Mortsauf gave me a glance that was less observing than awkwardly uneasy,--the glance of a man whose distrust grows out of his inability to analyze. After explaining the circumstances of our visit, and naming me to him, the countess gave him her place and left the room. The children, whose eyes were on those of their mother as if they drew the light of theirs from hers, tried to follow her; but she said, with a finger on her lips, “Stay dears!” and they obeyed, but their eyes filled. Ah! to hear that one word “dears” what tasks they would have undertaken!

Like the children, I felt less warm when she had left us. My name seemed to change the count’s feeling toward me. Cold and supercilious in his first glance, he became at once, if not affectionate, at least politely attentive, showing me every consideration and seeming pleased to receive me as a guest. My father had formerly done devoted service to the Bourbons, and had played an important and perilous, though secret part. When their cause was lost by the elevation of Napoleon, he took refuge in the quietude of the country and domestic life, accepting the unmerited accusations that followed him as the inevitable reward of those who risk all to win all, and who succumb after serving as pivot to the political machine. Knowing nothing of the fortunes, nor of the past, nor of the future of my family, I was unaware of this devoted service which the Comte de Mortsauf well remembered. Moreover, the antiquity of our name, the most precious quality of a man in his eyes, added to the warmth of his greeting. I knew nothing of these reasons until later; for the time being the sudden transition to cordiality put me at my ease. When the two children saw that we were all three fairly engaged in conversation, Madeleine slipped her head from her father’s hand, glanced at the open door, and glided away like an eel, Jacques following her. They rejoined their mother, and I heard their voices and their movements, sounding in the distance like the murmur of bees about a hive.

I watched the count, trying to guess his character, but I became so interested in certain leading traits that I got no further than a superficial examination of his personality. Though he was only forty-five years old, he seemed nearer sixty, so much had the great shipwreck at the close of the eighteenth century aged him. The crescent of hair which monastically fringed the back of his head, otherwise completely bald
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Though ten years of emigration and farm life had altered his physique, the count still showed traces of nobility. Even the most ardent liberal would have acknowledged his chivalric loyalty and steadfast convictions: a man devoted to a cause, honest in his political views, yet ignorant of France’s actual affairs. He was one of those upright souls who, while unable to serve his party, might inadvertently harm it—willing to sacrifice his life rather than his money.

At dinner I noticed the count’s flaccid cheeks and the furtive glances he cast at his children, revealing a burdened mind and a frail constitution he had passed to them. Though he might blame himself, he refused to be judged by others. His harsh demeanor, born of self-awareness of his faults, lacked grace and heightened the misery he had brought upon his family. When his wife returned with the children, an atmosphere of unhappiness settled over the house, as if walking over a vault and feeling the cold depths below.

After the conversation shifted, the count introduced me to his wife and shared details about my family that I had not known. He asked my age; when I answered the countess expressed surprise at her daughter’s age, perhaps thinking me younger. I sensed a connection forming: her maternal instincts sparked hope that her children might thrive. She scrutinized me, and in that moment some barriers between us dissolved. She had many questions but remained largely silent.

“If study has made you ill,” she said, “the air of our valley will soon restore you.”

“Modern education harms children,” the count remarked. “We burden them with mathematics and sciences, aging them prematurely. You must stay and rest here,” he urged. “You are overwhelmed by the avalanche of ideas. What future will universal education have unless we return it to religious hands?”

His words echoed what he later said during elections when he refused to support a talented candidate: “I shall always distrust men of talent.”

He then proposed a tour of the gardens.

“Monsieur—” his wife interjected.

“What is it, my dear?” he replied, revealing his desire to control his home.

“Monsieur de Vandenesse walked from Tours this morning, and Monsieur de Chessel has already taken him on foot over Frapesle.”

“Very imprudent of you,” the count said to me, shaking his head.

I quickly realized the rigidity of his royalism required careful navigation. The manservant, now in livery, announced dinner. Monsieur de Chessel offered his arm to Madame de Mortsauf, while the count took mine, and we went to the dining room.

The dining room, with its white tiled floor and varnished paper adorned with floral designs, was charming though unpretentious. Dinner was plentiful but not luxurious: family silver, mismatched china, flowers on the table. I found joy in these quaint details, feeling contentment that blinded me to the obstacles of country life. I sat beside her, serving her wine, and felt a profound connection. That kiss had bound us in a secret that filled me with both joy and shame. I endeavored to please the count, lavishing affection on the dogs and trying to engage the children, whom I hoped would accept me as one of their own. I sensed any sign of gloom would jeopardize my place in their lives.

Dinner passed in a haze of happiness: I reveled in being under her roof, ignoring her apparent coldness and the count’s polite indifference. Love, like life, has its adolescence, and I was content in my feelings. I made several foolish remarks, driven by passion, but no one noticed their cause; even she was oblivious to love. The rest of my visit felt dreamlike as I returned across the Indre, enchanted by moonlight and nature’s sounds. That evening marked a turning point; I felt the weight of past struggles clash with the joy I had just experienced.

Approaching Frapesle, I glanced at Clochegourde and saw a small boat tied to a tree—Monsieur de Mortsauf’s fishing boat.

“Well,” said Monsieur de Chessel, once we were out of earshot, “I needn’t ask if you found those shoulders; I must congratulate you on the reception Monsieur de Mortsauf gave you. You stepped into his heart at once.”

His words lifted my spirits, though I sensed underlying bitterness.

“How do you mean?” I asked.

“He has never received anyone so well,” he replied.

I admitted my surprise.

Monsieur de Chessel, whose real name was Durand, had abandoned his father’s name—a successful merchant during the Revolution—to adopt an old parliamentary name. His ambition led him to claim a count’s title under Louis XVIII, a title his children enjoyed without understanding the sacrifices it cost him. His character bore pettiness and envy; his ambition, recently rekindled by royal favor, made him ostentatious yet kindly toward me, providing a peace I had longed for. His interest in my affairs felt paternal, a contrast to the neglect I was used to; I was grateful for his hospitality.

The owners of Frapesle were intertwined with the dawn of my happiness, and I cherished those memories. Monsieur de Chessel’s ostentation annoyed some neighbors—fine horses, lavish entertaining—while the Comte de Mortsauf, with limited means, struggled to maintain his estate. Their interactions were polite but lacked intimacy.

Jealousy was not the sole cause of the Count de Mortsauf’s isolation. His education was superficial, lacking the depth suited to his nobility. He emigrated just as his education should have deepened, and a long idleness followed. Hopes for a restored monarchy kept him from seeking work; the trials of life eroded his spirit.

Reflecting on the count’s life, I felt no bitterness, even at his worst. His natural gaiety faded into moroseness; he fell ill, suffering from a condition prone to hypochondria. Hidden love affairs further deteriorated his health and prospects.

After twelve years of hardship he returned to France under a decree allowing emigrants to come back. Crossing the Rhine, he cried “France! France!” like a child calling for its mother. Once wealthy, he returned impoverished, stripped of authority and influence, burdened by his name. His unyielding opinions and past left him vulnerable to ridicule in a society that often mocked weakness. He eventually settled in Maine on a forgotten farm that gave him some stability.

The Lenoncourt family, having lost their fortune, welcomed him; he stayed with them while preparing a home. Mademoiselle de Lenoncourt, rather than rejecting him, accepted his proposal and lived with her aunt, the Duchesse de Verneuil, who guided her life.

Madame de Verneuil, a member of a devout society, profoundly influenced the countess, who remained devout. After her aunt’s death, Madame de Mortsauf received visits from Saint-Martin, who corrected his last works at Clochegourde. The duchess had endured trials and left Clochegourde to her niece, but her sudden death cast a shadow over the early years of the marriage.

Monsieur de Mortsauf found some solace in the valley, but the birth of his first child, Jacques, brought despair: the doctor pronounced the child unviable, a truth the count concealed from his wife. Subsequent births confirmed his fears, deepening his sense of failure.

The countess, sensing her husband’s turmoil, devoted herself to his care, striving to reconcile him with himself. She accepted his miserliness and mistrust, guiding him toward what was right, often at the expense of her own happiness. She resolved to remain at Clochegourde, fearing that leaving would harm their children. Her efforts masked the count’s incapacity, allowing him to find some peace in her presence.

This brief history also illuminated Monsieur de Chessel, who, despite worldly knowledge, could not fully grasp Clochegourde’s complexities. My own understanding deepened as I spent time there and felt the weight of unspoken truths. One evening I found Madame de Mortsauf watching a sunset, and I sensed a shared sorrow.

“Some days are hard to bear,” I remarked.

“You read my soul,” she replied, surprised.

“We touch at many points,” I said, recognizing our shared experiences of joy and sorrow.

She shuddered, and I felt compelled to express my understanding of our mutual suffering.

“Ah! My childhood was like a long illness—”

“I hear Madeleine coughing,” she interrupted, and left abruptly.

The countess welcomed my visits, seeing in me an amusement for her husband. I often played backgammon with the count, enduring his harshness and criticism. Despite his tyranny, the countess’s presence softened my hardships.

As I grew better at the game, the count’s temper flared when I began to win. I learned to balance our matches—letting him win at first, then evening the score. The countess understood my strategy and thanked me with a grateful gaze that filled me with joy.

One evening, after an intense game, the count’s mood shifted dramatically into rage. I left the room and waited in the garden. When she joined me, she revealed her husband’s condition and asked me to forget the incident.

“Promise me to bury the recollection of that scene,” she implored. “I don’t ask you to swear it; just give me your word of honor.”

“I will do all you wish,” I replied, “but I cannot change my opinion of him.”

She acknowledged my feelings and urged me to understand his struggles.

“Perhaps for my sake, you will forget what he said to you today,” she suggested. “He will wish to undo the wrong he did.”

“Five days without seeing you?” I lamented.

“Do not put such warmth into your manner of speaking to me,” she cautioned.

We walked in silence; she eventually said, “It is late; we will part.”

I wished to kiss her hand; she hesitated before allowing it.

“Never take it unless I give it to you,” she warned. “Leave me my freedom.”

As I departed I felt a profound connection, pledging my love in silence.

The next day I reflected on our bond, feeling purpose and commitment to her. I recognized her sacrifices and strength. Our shared sufferings had forged a connection beyond friendship, binding us in a deep understanding of each other’s pain and resilience.

In the days that followed, small moments deepened my affection. I was determined to support her, to be a source of strength, and to honor the bond we had formed. Navigating my feelings, I understood our connection was rare and precious, something I would cherish and protect. The love I felt for Madame de Mortsauf was more than passion; it was a commitment to stand by her, to share her struggles, and to celebrate the beauty of our shared existence.

Beneath the stars I vowed to honor her spirit and nurture the love that had blossomed between us—an affection meant to endure through life’s trials.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
This scene took place on a Tuesday. I waited until Sunday and did not cross the river. During those five days, much had occurred at Clochegourde. The count received his brevet as general of brigade, the cross of Saint Louis, and a pension of four thousand francs. The Duc de Lenoncourt-Givry, made peer of France, regained two forests, resumed his place at court, and his wife reclaimed unsold property that had once been imperial crown lands. Consequently, the Comtesse de Mortsauf became an heiress. Her mother arrived at Clochegourde, bringing a hundred thousand francs saved at Givry—the amount of her dowry, which the count had never demanded despite his poverty. With his own savings the count bought two neighboring estates yielding about nine thousand francs a year. His son would inherit the grandfather’s peerage; the count now saw a way to entail the estate upon him without harming Madeleine, and the Duc de Lenoncourt would likely help secure a good marriage.

These events soothed the count’s troubled mind. The presence of the Duchesse de Lenoncourt at Clochegourde was significant for the neighborhood. I reflected gloomily on her caste spirit, which my love for Henriette had previously hidden beneath noble sentiments. Who was I—poor, insignificant, with no future but my courage and faculties? I did not think of the Restoration’s wider implications. On Sunday morning, in the private chapel where I sat with Monsieur and Madame de Chessel and the Abbé de Quelus, I glanced eagerly at the duchess’s chapel, where the duchess and her daughter, the count and his children, were praying. Henriette’s large straw hat did not tremble; her unconsciousness of my presence bound me to her more than our past had. She prayed with such abandonment that she seemed a religious statue, which moved me deeply.

By village custom vespers followed mass. After church, Madame de Chessel suggested going to Frapesle rather than cross the Indre twice in the heat. Monsieur de Chessel offered his arm to the duchess, Madame de Chessel took the count’s, and I offered mine to the countess, feeling her arm against my side for the first time. As we walked through the woods of Sache, where light filtered through foliage, sensations and proud thoughts overwhelmed me, making my heart beat violently.

“What is the matter?” she asked after a moment.

“I have heard of your good fortune,” I said. “Will your new dignities change you and lessen your friendship?”

“Change me!” she cried. “Oh, fie! Another such idea and I shall— not despise you, but forget you forever.”

I looked at her with ecstasy.

“We profit by new laws which we have neither made nor sought,” she said. “We are neither place-hunters nor beggars; neither Monsieur de Mortsauf nor I can leave Clochegourde. By my advice he has declined the command at the Maison Rouge. We are content my father should have it. This forced modesty has benefited our son. The king, whose household my father joins, will favor Jacques’ education. He must represent both Lenoncourt and Mortsauf. I can have no ambition except for him; he must live and be made worthy. Who will keep him safe in Paris? My friend,” she said, her voice breaking, “be some day his guardian and sponsor. Go to Paris; if your family will not support you, ours—especially my mother, who rules society—will help you. Put the strength of your desires into a noble ambition—”

“I understand,” I interrupted. “Ambition will be my mistress. I do not need it to be wholly yours. No, I will not be rewarded for my obedience here by favors there. I will go and make my own way. From you, I would accept everything; from others, nothing.”

“Child!” she murmured, pleased.

“Besides, I have taken my vows,” I continued. “I am resolved to bind myself to you by ties that can never be broken.”

She trembled and stopped.

“What do you mean?” she asked.

“First tell me how you wish me to love you.”

“Love me as my aunt loved me,” she answered. “I gave you her rights when I permitted you to call me by her chosen name.”

“Then I must love without hope and with absolute devotion. I will enter a seminary, become a priest, and educate your son. Jacques shall be myself in his own form; political conceptions, energy, patience—I will give him all. I will live near you; my love, enclosed in religion, can never be suspected of evil. I will consume myself in the flame and love you with a purified love.”

She turned pale. “Félix, do not bind yourself in a way that might be an obstacle. I should die of grief. Do you think despairing love a life’s vocation? Wait for life’s trials. Marry neither the Church nor a woman—marry not at all—I forbid it. Remain free. You are twenty-one—My God! can I have mistaken him? I thought two months sufficed to know some souls.”

“What hope have you?” I cried.

“Accept our help, rise in life, make your way and your fortune, and you shall know my hope. And,” she added as if whispering, “never release the hand you are holding at this moment.”

She bent to my ear as she said it.

“Madeleine!” I exclaimed. “Never!”

We neared a wooden gate into the park of Frapesle. Suddenly an idea—the count’s death—flashed through me, and I said, “I understand you.”

“I am glad of it,” she answered, as though surprised at my thought.

Her purity drew tears of admiration that mingled with the bitterness of passion. I thought she did not love me enough even to wish me liberty; love that recoils from crime seems limited. “She does not love me,” I thought.

To hide my pain, I kissed Madeleine’s hair. “I am afraid of your mother,” I said to the countess.

“So am I,” she answered, playful. “Don’t forget to call her Madame la duchesse and speak to her in the third person. Young people have lost polite manners; you must learn them for my sake. It is good taste to respect women, no matter their age, and to recognize social distinctions. The respect shown to established superiority guarantees what is due to you. You have drunk the milk of the Revolution in your academy; but as you advance, you will find crude principles of liberty powerless to create happiness. Before considering what an aristocracy ought to be, my common sense tells me societies can exist only through a hierarchy. Be on our side—especially now,” she added, laughing, “when it triumphs.”

I was touched by her combination of political feeling and affection. In defending her husband she had foreseen criticisms I might make on seeing the servility he showed her mother. Monsieur de Mortsauf, king in his castle, had a certain dignity; yet I was astonished at the obsequious distance he placed between himself and the duchess. Humiliated by his degradation, I understood the martyrdom of generous women yoked to petty men. I was respectful to the duchess because of my youth; but where others saw only a duchess, I saw Henriette’s mother, and that gave sanctity to my homage.

At Frapesle the count presented me to the duchess, who examined me coldly. Madame de Lenoncourt was fifty-six, wonderfully preserved, erect and imposing, with a hard face. Her courtly manner reminded me of my own mother. I behaved well; as I passed the countess she said softly, “You are perfect.”

The count took my hand. “You are not angry with me, Felix, are you? If I was hasty, pardon an old soldier. We shall probably stay for dinner, and I invite you on Thursday, the evening before the duchess leaves. I must go to Tours tomorrow. Don’t neglect Clochegourde. My mother-in-law is an acquaintance I advise you to cultivate. Her salon will set the tone for the faubourg St. Germain. She has all the traditions of the great world and immense social knowledge.”

The count’s changed circumstances showed in his softened manner. The duchess was not patronizing; Monsieur and Madame de Chessel accepted the invitation. The duchess questioned me about my family and, hearing that the Vandenesse in diplomacy was my brother, became almost affectionate. She told me my great-aunt, the old Marquise de Listomere, was a Grandlieu, and that by a provision of the Charter my father was once more Marquis de Vandenesse.

“I am but one thing, the serf of Clochegourde,” I said to the countess.

The Restoration’s transformation bewildered our generation. To me, the revolution meant nothing; the least word from Madame de Mortsauf was the sole event of importance. I was ignorant of privy councils and politics; my sole ambition was to love Henriette better than Petrarch loved Laura. This indifference made the duchess take me for a child. A large company assembled at Frapesle, and to a young man unused to the world, seeing the woman he loves admired by all is intoxicating. The count, delighted, seemed almost young; his wife hoped for change; I amused myself with Madeleine, whose clever observations made others laugh. It was a happy day. A word, a hope awakened in the morning and illuminated nature. Seeing me joyous, Henriette was joyful too.

“That happiness smiling on my gray and cloudy life seems good,” she said to me the next day.

I spent that day at Clochegourde. The count left early for Tours. A serious disagreement arose between mother and daughter. The duchess wanted the countess to move to Paris, where she promised a place at court and where the count might accept a position. Henriette, hiding her husband’s incapacity and her own sufferings, opposed leaving Clochegourde because its air and sky calmed his excitements and soothed her children’s health. She had persuaded him to go to Tours to transact business so as to hide his condition from the duchess. I alone knew Clochegourde’s dark secret.

Henriette saw that the duchess cared little for Jacques and Madeleine—a painful discovery. The duchess brooked no opposition; she used sweetness, then cold severity, then sarcasm, to force compliance. In those ten days Henriette endured all the contentions a young woman must face to establish independence. To picture their struggle, imagine a lily bruised under a polished wheel. That mother had nothing in common with her daughter; she could not even imagine the difficulties that forced Henriette to remain at Clochegourde. Families hide internal dissensions; behind scenes almost all contain deep wounds that lessen natural affections. Tortured and wounded, Henriette loved the one who did not strike her, who would build a shield around her. I was happy when she rested upon my heart; she told me of her troubles. Day by day I learned more fully what she meant by “Love me as my aunt loved me.”

“Have you no ambition?” the duchess asked me at dinner.

“Madame,” I replied, “I have enough in me to conquer the world; but I am only twenty-one, and I am all alone.”

She looked at her daughter in astonishment. The duchess’s visit meant constraint. The countess begged me to be cautious. The great Thursday was a day of wearisome ceremonial. But the duchess returned to court pomps and Clochegourde recovered its order.

My quarrel with the count had made me more at home; I could go there at all times. I clung like a climbing plant to the beautiful soul that had opened the world of shared emotions. Our fraternal marriage, founded on trust, became surer; Henriette enfolded me with maternal care, while my love for her burned like hot irons when away. I loved her with a double love—seraphic in her presence, searing when absent. At my age I was not yet man enough to torture her, who feared catastrophe to her children, who sat beside them when her husband allowed her a little rest. The mere sound of ardor shook her; she needed veiled love, support mingled with tenderness—that which she gave to others. This situation brought delightful languor and secret immolation. Her conscience and self-devotion awed me; the piety that was the bond of her virtues filled the air with spiritual incense. She gave me only the back of her hand to kiss, never the palm, as though drawing the line of sensual emotions. No two souls ever clasped each other with such ardor yet no earthly tie bound us. Later I understood why that sufficed: in youth we love the whole woman, her children and interests, as our own.

I was now one of the household and knew infinite sweetness—the privilege of being the mistress’s friend in a strange family. Servants treated me well; the children divined my affection and were discreet. True passions bloom more charmingly in barren soil.

But I also saw the full extent of Monsieur de Mortsauf’s failings. He scolded perpetually about nothing, complained of imaginary evils, and had an inward dissatisfaction that demanded victims. On walks he selected the way and was bored whichever way we went; at home he blamed others. He found domineering pleasure in touching his wife’s sensitive chords. Sometimes he fell into gloomy silence that alarmed her and brought tender attentions. Like petted children, he let her serve him as she did Jacques and Madeleine. I discovered his petty tyranny in the household details and realized how it stifled the family, hindered management, and retarded improvement of the estate. The countess had been noble in describing these daily struggles. My admiration for her rose higher than my love; I yielded to be a voluntary victim to come nearer her. She allowed me a place beside her and permission to share her sorrows; eager to die in her arena, I became a repentant apostate seeking heaven with my brethren.

“Were it not for you, I must have succumbed under this life,” Henriette said when the count had been more venomous than usual.

He had gone to bed. Henriette and I stayed under the acacias with the children playing in the setting sun. Our few words revealed mutual thoughts; when language failed our silence served, and our souls seemed to enter one another. We luxuriated in pensive languor and asked by a look, “Among all our days on earth, will there be one for us?”

Despite the evening’s poetry, desire crept through me. After three months of repression I was unable to accept my assigned fate. I took Henriette’s hand and caressed it. She at once withdrew it; tears from my eyes fell and she offered her hand to my lips.

“You must know,” she said, “that this will cause me grief. A friendship that asks such a favor is dangerous.”

Then I lost control; I reproached her, spoke of my sufferings and of a slight alleviation I dared ask. I told her that at my age the soul had a sex and that I could meet death but not silence my lips. She forced me to silence with a proud glance. Ever since the gate of Frapesle, when I attributed to her the hope that our happiness might spring from a grave, I had shunned the thought of staining her soul. She said she could never be wholly mine; if I could not be to her somewhat as her old confessor—less than a lover yet more than a brother—she must never see me again. She could die and offer her sufferings to God.

“I gave you,” she said, “more than I ought, so that nothing might be left to take, and I am punished.”

I calmed her, promised never to cause pain, and to love her as an old man loves his youngest child.

The next day I came early; there were no flowers in her gray salon. I rushed into the fields and vineyards to make two bouquets; as I gathered them it occurred to me that color and foliage have meanings, and like melody awaken memory. I enlisted Jacques and Madeleine and arranged two bouquets on the portico steps to convey a sentiment—white roses and lilies, with blue flowers intermingled, symbolizing two purities: the child and the martyr. The countess discerned it inwardly and gave me a poignant glance that was reward enough. I pressed the theories of Père Castel into service and recovered a lost science: the language of flowers. What charm in expressing our sensations through these daughters of the sun! I communed with the flora of the fields, seeking varieties that would complete my messages.

Twice a week I pursued this poetic enterprise, walking long distances to find flowers, initiating myself into pleasures unknown to the man of science—a poet studying spirit rather than form. Nature offered scenes whose significance rose to the highest moral conceptions: heather with dew like diamonds, a mossy rock-clad corner like a savage cry, anemone pulsatilla like my pure idol alone in her valley, sheets of water with floating worlds of life, a cottage garden as the image of humble existence, or a forest path like a cathedral nave. I gathered such images and poured them into bouquets.

In September and October no bouquet cost less than three hours’ search. These floral symphonies expressed what no declaration of love could; my baffled desires found expression as Beethoven found in notes. In their presence, Madame de Mortsauf was my Henriette. She looked at them constantly; they nourished her spirit. These neutral pleasures soothed me: abstinence brings deadly exhaustion, and a few crumbs of heavenly comfort keep one from disaster. Sometimes I found her standing before the bouquets lost in agitation; she would lift her head and murmur, “Ah, how beautiful!”

Throughout the month I often saw her at the window at my arrival. If I was late, she wandered on the terrace and told me she had come to meet me and tend her youngest child.

Backgammon had ended. The count’s purchases engaged him inspecting his new properties. He was neither arrogant nor offensive, and our walks together were mutual joys. On one occasion the count, wishing to know what we talked about, asked; Henriette answered in words with a double meaning that satisfied him. Madeleine laughed. Our spiritual union continued.

The days passed with new joys. The grape harvest—the vintage—began in late September. It is easier to gather grapes than to mow wheat. The vintage brings abundance and hilarity: coopers and carts, coopers and laughing girls, men and panniers. Classes are equal for the day; everyone shares the harvest. Jacques and Madeleine, who had never seen a vintage, were full of delight. We went to Villaines for baskets; none of us were to eat too many grapes. Jacques made me swear to stay at Clochegourde. The day in the vineyard was glorious: the children’s chatter, their racing about, the mother laughing with the joy of youth; she passed a hand round my neck and tapped my cheek, “You are melting away”—the only caress she ever gave me. I filled my basket and emptied it into the vat, moving slowly in regulated motion that kept my spirit free. I found the pleasure of external labor that regulates passion; I learned monastic discipline.

For the first time in long weeks the count was neither surly nor cruel. His son’s rosy face rejoiced him. He had promised a dance in front of Clochegourde to celebrate the Bourbons’ return. As we returned, the countess leaned on my arm and whispered, “You bring us happiness.”

To me, burdened with knowledge of her sleepless nights and cares, those words were more than any other woman could give.

“The terrible monotony of my life is broken; all things are radiant with hope,” she said. “Oh, never leave me! Be the elder son, the protector of the younger.”

This is not romantic; in youth passion restrained by obstacles can fill the crater of a volcano with pure water.

We had another fête. The countess, wishing to accustom her children to practical life, gave Jacques the produce of the walnut trees and Madeleine that of the chestnuts. Gathering chestnuts and walnuts, seeing the children take pride in their small granaries, the petty joys of harvest and calculation, made charming scenes of innocent happiness amid autumn’s fading colors. Jacques’ walnuts suffered from rain; I advised him to hold back and sell later. His father urged prudence and reserve funds; the mother rejoiced to see Jacques listen. These homely scenes attached me ever more closely to Henriette.

I learned how the countess had, over ten years, changed cultivation methods—“put it in fours,” rotating crops and dividing the estate into four farms on share leases. She induced the count to cultivate a model farm and rebuild two farmhouses to relet for money rents afterward. Fearing to die before her husband, she sought to secure his income and her children’s property. Fruit trees planted in the last ten years were in full bearing; hedges and elms grew well. With the new purchases and farming system, Clochegourde—divided into four farms—could bring in forty thousand francs a year, not counting vineyards and woodlands. The new road to Chinon would make tenants plentiful. The countess wished to invest fifteen thousand francs in each new estate to improve houses so they would yield better rents; this required thirty thousand francs she and her husband argued about. The fear “If I die tomorrow, what will become of them?” drove her. The count objected, but common sense carried the day. That day we went to the Cassine and the Rhetorière to decide on buildings; she spoke gently, confident of success. A carrier wanted a large farm on the new route; another honest man was ready to take la Baude; the soil would attract tenants. In two years Clochegourde might yield twenty-four thousand francs. Gravelotte in Maine was rented for seven thousand a year; his pension was four thousand. Later additions might let her go to Paris and arrange Jacques’ education.

With what feeling she uttered “Paris!” I knew she wished not to be separated from her friend. I told her I would finish my education and work to be Jacques’ tutor. She looked grave.

“No, Félix,” she said. “That cannot be, any more than your priesthood. I thank you as a mother, but as a woman who loves you, I can never allow you to be the victim of your attachment. Such a position would be a social discredit to you. My father would never forgive your taking such a humble place; he would refuse you his protection. You must accept society as it is; never fly in its face. This rash proposal of—”

“Love,” I whispered.

“No, charity,” she said, controlling tears. “This wild idea enlightens me as to your character; your heart will be your bane. I shall claim the right to teach you sometimes. Let my woman’s eye see for you. From the solitudes of Clochegourde I will share in your successes. As to a tutor, do not fear; we shall find some good old abbé, my father will devote sums to the boy’s education. Jacques is my pride; he is eleven years old.”

At the Cassine Jacques, Madeleine, and I followed her like children. I left to speak with Martineau and saw how beloved she was. A laborer told me she was good and knew our hardships and treated the people well. I gave that man all the money I had.

A pony arrived for Jacques; the father, an excellent horseman, would accustom him gradually. The morning of the first lesson, with Madeleine shouting and all the household clustered round, was a maternal festival. Jacques wore a blue collar embroidered by his mother and rode fearlessly. The count smiled for the first time in months; the mother burst into tears and leaned on my arm, “I think I have never suffered. Do not leave us today.” The child jumped into her arms; I and Madeleine arranged bouquets for dinner. She said, “The fifteenth of October is certainly a great day for me. Jacques has taken his first riding lesson, and I have just set the last stitch in my furniture cover.”

“Then, Blanche,” the count laughed, “I must pay you for it.”

He offered her his arm; an open carriage her father had sent awaited with two English horses. As we returned, she whispered anxiously, “I am too happy; happiness is like illness—it overwhelms me; I fear it may vanish.”

I loved her so passionately I was jealous. She asked me what my eyes said; I told her. She was more touched than by any gift, then poured comfort into my heart. “Love me as my aunt loved me,” she said. “If I take your life, must I not be grateful?”

“It was time I finished my tapestry,” she added. “Men find occupations a resource against troubles; we women need physical exercise to control inward sufferings. Each stitch rocked my thoughts; to every stitch I confided my secrets. While doing my last chair I thought much of you. What you put into your bouquets I have said in my embroidery.”

Dinner was lovely. Jacques offered his garland to his mother with charming grace. In the afternoon we played backgammon; the count was charming. They accompanied me to Frapesle in the tranquil twilight. It was a day of days for the poor woman.

Soon the riding lessons became a source of contention. The countess feared the father's harsh reprimands; Jacques grew thin and wore dark circles. I advised him to tell his father when tired, but the expedient failed, and the old huntsman took over. Angry reproaches resumed. Then the cost of the Cassine and Rhetorière buildings exceeded estimates by half. The news, given first to Monsieur de Mortsauf instead of his wife, became the ground of a quarrel that grew bitter until the count’s malady demanded its arrearages.

That day I had gone from Frapesle to search for flowers with Madeleine. Returning, I could not find her and heard cries in the house. Madeleine ran out: “The general,” she cried, “is scolding mamma; go and defend her.”

I reached the salon without being seen. Monsieur de Mortsauf was in violent tirade.

“Never marry, Félix,” he said. “A woman is led by the devil; the most virtuous would invent evil if it did not exist; they are all vile.”

Arguments flew. He harked back to old troubles, cursed the new farming system, declared he could have been twice as rich if he had managed Clochegourde. He sprang around, displacing furniture; then stopped, moaned his marrow was on fire, that his wife had ruined him. The countess smiled and looked upward.

“Yes, Blanche,” he cried, “you are my executioner; you are killing me; you are a monster of hypocrisy. She is smiling! Do you know why she smiles, Félix?”

I kept silence.

“That woman denies me all happiness; she is no more to me than to you, and yet she pretends to be my wife! She fulfills none of the duties of laws, human and divine; she lies to God and man. She puts all her art into keeping me away; she has made me mad through privations; she is killing me by degrees, and she thinks herself a saint and takes the sacrament every month!”

Henriette wept bitterly, answering only, “Monsieur! monsieur! monsieur!”

The count’s words made me burn with shame for him and stirred my heart because they struck at chastity and delicacy—the warp and woof of first love.

“She is virgin at my expense,” cried the count.

At this, the countess cried, “Monsieur!”

“And what mean you by your imperious ‘Monsieur!’?” he shouted. “Am I not your master? Must I teach you that I am?”

He came toward her, thrusting forward his white wolf’s head; his yellow eyes looked savage. Henriette slid from her chair to avoid a blow, lay at full length, and lost consciousness. The count stopped bewildered. I took her in my arms; the count opened the door of her bedroom. We laid her, still dressed, on the bed. When she revived she motioned to unfasten her belt; the count found scissors; I made her breathe salts and she opened her eyes. The count left the room, ashamed. Two hours passed in silence. Henriette’s hand lay in mine; she pressed it but could not speak. Once she rose on her elbow and whispered, “Unhappy man!—ah! if you did but know—” then sank back. The memory of past sufferings and the present shock threw her into convulsions I calmed by an instinctive magnetism. I smoothed her hair—the first time I touched it—and sat looking at the simple room, its chintz curtains, its crucifix, her aunt’s portrait, the children’s drawings with locks of hair. What renunciations of luxury for such a woman—the chamber of a married nun, filled with holy resignation. Painful as the sight was, it exposed hidden, irreparable woe.

When the children and Manette came in I left. The count waited for me; he seemed to seek me as mediator. He caught my hands, exclaiming, “Stay, stay with us, Félix!”

“Unfortunately,” I said, “Monsieur de Chessel has a party, and my absence would cause remark. But after dinner I will return.”

He left the house with me and took me to the lower gate.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
As I read the letter, I felt the maternal heart beneath my fingers, a warmth that contrasted sharply with my own mother's coldness. I understood why the countess had forbidden me to open it in Touraine; she likely feared I would break down in tears.

I met my brother Charles, who until then had been almost a stranger. His haughtiness created a barrier, preventing any brotherly affection. He lectured me on social matters I already understood, and his mistrust made me feel awkward. If not for my deep love, his condescension would have made me feel foolish. He presented me in society, expecting my dullness to highlight his qualities. Remembering my childhood sorrows, I recognized his vanity for what it was, not brotherly love. My solitude allowed me to perceive the nuances of affection around me; since returning from Clochegourde, I could compare my experiences and realized that happiness illuminates understanding.

I often visited the Duchesse de Lenoncourt, where Henriette's name was seldom mentioned. Only the old duke, who welcomed me warmly, seemed to know of my connection to her. Just as I began to overcome my shyness and appreciate social pleasures, the events of March 20th unfolded.

Following my brother to Ghent, I went there on Henriette's advice, accompanying the Duc de Lenoncourt. The duke's kindness turned into sincere protection as he saw my loyalty to the Bourbons. He introduced me to the king, who valued my devotion during difficult times. A letter from Madame de Mortsauf informed me of Jacques' illness, and I sensed her distress. She needed support while caring for her son, and despite my ambition to rival my brother, I prioritized her sadness. I decided to leave the court and serve my true sovereign. The king needed a trustworthy messenger, and I gladly accepted the mission, eager to return to Clochegourde.

After carrying out the king's orders in France, I was forced to flee Bonapartist authorities. I traveled through Vendée, eventually reaching Clochegourde, where I learned Jacques was better. The count welcomed me, and upon entering the salon I was introduced to Henriette, who was surprised and joyful to see me. We exchanged heartfelt greetings; she prepared my room while the count provided food.

At dinner I learned of the disasters at Waterloo and the flight of Napoleon, but my primary concern was Henriette's well-being. She had built an ice-house for me, her efforts to provide iced water a testament to her affection. Over the next week she regained health and spirits, and I marveled at her beauty, realizing that absence had only intensified my love for her.

Henriette described her nights by Jacques' bedside and her prayers for his life; her devotion was evident. Yet the count's harshness interrupted her reflections, causing her pain. She questioned why her words never found favor with him, revealing the emotional toll of their relationship. Despite her struggles, she maintained a sense of duty toward her family, urging her children to respect their father.

As we discussed the estate, Henriette told me of their agricultural success, and I explained my mission for the king. She had a remarkable faculty for foreseeing events concerning her children, which she attributed to divine intervention. I admired her wisdom and foresight and felt grateful for her guidance.

Henriette encouraged me to pursue my ambitions in Paris, emphasizing the importance of being present for the king's needs. Our bond deepened as we shared thoughts and dreams, and I felt a growing sense of belonging in her life. Yet the count's presence loomed, and I sensed tension in their marriage.

One day Henriette confided in me about her struggles with the count's behavior, expressing fears for her children's well-being. She felt trapped where duty to family conflicted with her own happiness. I urged her to assert herself, but she hesitated, fearful of the consequences of confrontation.

As the count's illness worsened, Henriette and I took turns caring for him. Our shared experience brought us closer; I took joy in supporting her. The count's recovery was slow, and though it marked a turning point, it also brought back his erratic behavior. Henriette's patience was tested as she struggled to maintain authority; I witnessed the toll it took on her.

When the count regained strength he became increasingly difficult to manage. Henriette remained determined to care for her family, often putting her children's needs above her own. I admired her selflessness, yet felt the weight of my feelings for her and the complexity added by the count's presence.

We found moments of happiness together: intimate conversations, shared vulnerabilities, and mutual support. These moments strengthened our connection, though always shadowed by the count's influence. I reassured Henriette of my unwavering support when she expressed fears about the future, sharing a deep sense of connection even as the reality of her situation weighed on us both.

As the count's health improved, he resumed his domineering behavior and Henriette struggled to maintain composure. I longed to alleviate her burdens; our bond deepened further as we faced household complexities together, yet the specter of his authority remained large.

Eventually I returned to Paris, consumed by responsibilities but still committed to Henriette. Our correspondence sustained us; her letters revealed the depth of her love and the weight of her burdens. I admired her strength but felt the pain of her isolation. News later reached me of Jacques' illness and the toll it took on her—her despair was palpable and I felt helpless to ease it. Despite my own struggles, I remained devoted, hoping to offer support.

Throughout, Henriette's resilience and maternal devotion shone. She navigated her obligations with courage, often sacrificing personal happiness for her children and household duties. My loyalty to her only grew; our love was a guiding light amid adversity, a rare and precious bond I cherished and remained hopeful would endure.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
During a deeply emotional period in my life, I encountered a remarkable woman at the Elysee-Bourbon salons. Immensely wealthy, of noble lineage and married to a distinguished British peer, her beauty, grace, and wit made her the idol of Parisian society, where she ruled with a firm yet charming demeanor.

The English, distant and reserved, inhabit a world of strict laws and rigid virtues. This upbringing produces a particular Englishwoman who, though delicate and charming, is trapped in hypocrisy and compelled to maintain appearances; her passion, like Shakespeare’s, is intense but constrained.

You may envy these women, but they are complex, convinced that love alone suffices. My liaison with the Marchioness of Dudley became notorious. At a time when my better feelings were subdued, I was drawn to her; my fidelity to Madame de Mortsauf only increased her desire. Lady Dudley craved the chase, and my resistance only inflamed her passion. Her remark about my relationship with Madame de Mortsauf—“I am wearied to death of these turtle-dove sighings”—should have warned me.

Men have fewer means to resist women than women have to escape men. Social codes keep men from appearing harsh; women are expected to be coy. Though I loved Madame de Mortsauf, I was not immune to Lady Dudley’s beauty and rank. Her attention in society stirred me, and she often hinted she would be my mistress. After one particularly beguiling evening she made her intentions clear, provoking a scandal that shocked the British aristocracy.

Seemingly fragile, this woman possessed a strong will. Her physical courage was remarkable—she could outpace any horse—and she pursued her desires relentlessly. By contrast, Madame de Mortsauf was nurturing and expansive, drawing others into her warmth; Lady Dudley was intense and consuming.

English customs reflect a materialist bent, valuing comfort and order often at the expense of spiritual depth. Lady Dudley embodied that materialism: compelling physically but leaving an emptiness I did not feel with Madame de Mortsauf, whose love was spiritual and boundless.

Lady Dudley’s jealousy was masked by charm; she sought to erase Madame de Mortsauf from my heart. I continued to write to Madame de Mortsauf, but my letters went unanswered, filling me with dread. When I finally returned to Clochegourde, a coldness revealed the harm my infidelity had caused.

Madame de Mortsauf’s demeanor had altered; she was distant and sorrowful, her beauty dimmed by grief. I felt the weight of my betrayal as I watched her withdraw, pride and pain evident. The family gathered around me, but I perceived her retreat. The count, unaware of the turmoil, welcomed me warmly, while Madame de Mortsauf remained aloof.

Witnessing her, I realized the depth of my wrongdoing. I had brought her suffering, and my heart ached for the love I had jeopardized. The count, whose own health was fragile, expressed concern for his wife and confessed his fears, sharing the emotional toll he bore.

Madame de Mortsauf’s health seemed delicate, and I was tormented by the thought that I was its cause. I longed to make amends, but she remained guarded, her heart closed. Our conversations were strained, full of unspoken words and lingering pain.

The count’s condition declined, and I felt helpless as I watched its effect on Madame de Mortsauf. Devoted to her children, she sought solace in their well-being, yet shadows of despair crept into her life. I was torn between love for her and my entanglement with Lady Dudley, whose presence still loomed.

In desperation I sought Madame de Mortsauf’s forgiveness, but she rebuffed me, insisting I had caused her too much pain. Left to grapple with guilt, I felt the weight of my actions pressing down on me.

As I spent more time with the family, I observed further changes in Madame de Mortsauf. Her once-vibrant spirit was dulled; I feared for her health and resolved to seek atonement, though the path seemed fraught.

The tension between us grew and the distance widened. I was caught in a web of my own making, torn between two women who represented different aspects of love: Lady Dudley’s passionate, material allure and Madame de Mortsauf’s nurturing devotion. I was left to navigate the complexities of my heart.

In the end I understood that choices have consequences. I was forced to confront the true nature of love and sacrifice; my desires had duties attached, and the harm I caused those I cared for weighed heavily on me.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
I know nothing more destructive than the wit of an Englishwoman; it carries the pompous conviction with which the British mask their prejudices. French wit is like lace, adorning life’s joys and quarrels; English wit is corrosive, stripping flesh until only bone remains. Arabella wielded her power like a sultan, cutting down rivals with her words.

“My angel,” she said, “I can speak morality too. I’ve questioned whether my love for you is a crime, and I find it both natural and pious. God created beauty to inspire adoration. The real crime would be not to love you. That other woman insults you by comparing you to men; the laws of morality do not apply to you, for you are above them. Am I not drawing closer to divine love by loving you? Will God punish a woman for seeking the divine? My love is a weakness, while that woman’s is strength. Don’t frown; I do not wish her ill. I adore the morality that has freed you for me—because you are mine forever, aren’t you?”

“Yes.”

“Forever and ever?”

“Yes.”

“Ah! I have found favor in my lord! I alone understand his worth! You say she knows how to cultivate her estate. I leave that to farmers; I cultivate your heart.”

I try to recall this intoxicating babble to convey Arabella and the events that followed. How to describe the passion mingled with her words? She sought to obliterate the impressions left by Henriette’s dignified love with impetuous affection. Arabella’s fierce attack revealed fear and admiration for her rival. The next morning she was tearful, lamenting a sleepless night.

“What troubles you?” I asked.

“I fear my love will ruin me,” she replied. “I have given all. That woman possesses something you still desire. If you prefer her, forget me; I will not trouble you. I will go far and die, like a plant deprived of sunlight.”

She extracted reluctant declarations from me and filled with joy.

“Ah!” she exclaimed, drying her eyes. “I am happy. Go back to her; I do not want to owe you to the force of my love, but to your own will. If you return, I shall know you love me as much as I love you, which I always doubted.”

She persuaded me to return to Clochegourde. The false position I placed myself in did not strike me under her influence. Had I refused to return, I would have given Lady Dudley a triumph over Henriette. Arabella would have taken me to Paris; to go to Clochegourde now insulted Madame de Mortsauf—Arabella was sure of me. Would any loving woman forgive crimes against love? Unless she were an angel, a loving woman would rather see her lover die than know him happy with another. Thus, my leaving Clochegourde for the Grenadiere was fatal to my true love and beneficial to the transient affection that held me. Lady Dudley had calculated skillfully.

When I met the countess that morning, she was pale and depressed, like one who had not slept. The perception still given to generous hearts revealed the nature of actions the world ignores but lofty spirits call criminal. Like a child playing near a precipice, I realized she and I were separated by a universe. A wail rose within us, echoing the woeful “Consummatum est” of Good Friday. Henriette’s illusions were shattered; her heart had endured its passion. She refused to look at me, denying me the light that had shone on my life for six years. I felt the wrong of bringing into this roof, where pleasure was unknown, a face that had known joy. If I had let Lady Dudley depart alone and returned to Clochegourde, perhaps Henriette would not have resolved to treat me as a brother. But now she paid me ostentatious attentions, humiliating, like caring for a sick man.

“You were out walking early,” said the count. “I hope you have brought back a good appetite, you whose stomach is not yet destroyed.”

That remark, which made Henriette smile, completed my sense of ridicule. Day and night I could not be at Clochegourde and Saint-Cyr. By day, it was difficult to become friends with the woman I had long loved; the transition, though possible with time, felt like an illness. I was ashamed; I cursed the pleasure Lady Dudley gave me; I wished Henriette would demand my blood. I could not tear her rival apart before her, for she avoided speaking of Arabella. Had I mentioned her, Henriette would have despised my infamy. After five years of delightful intercourse, we had nothing to say; our words had no connection with our thoughts; we hid intolerable pain from each other.

Henriette feigned cheerfulness, but she was sad. She called herself my sister, yet we had no common ground and remained in constrained silence. She increased my misery by pretending to be the only victim.

“I suffer more than you,” I said at one point.

“How so?” she asked haughtily.

“Because I am the one to blame.”

Eventually her manner grew so cold that I resolved to leave Clochegourde. That evening on the terrace I bade farewell. As I took my horse, she said, “Let us walk down the avenue together, alone.” We walked slowly. At the grove marking the boundary, she stopped.

“Farewell, my friend,” she said, resting her head on my chest and wrapping her arms around me. “Farewell, we shall never meet again. God has given me the sad power to see the future. Do you remember the terror when you first returned, so young, so handsome? I saw you turn your back on me as you do now. Once again, I have seen into the future. Friend, we speak for the last time. I can hardly say a few words; part of me speaks. Death has seized something in me. You have taken the mother from her children; I ask you to take her place. You can; Jacques and Madeleine love you, as if you had always made them suffer.”

“Die!” I cried, frightened at the fire in her eyes. “Henriette, I command you to live. Swear to me you will send for Origet and obey him in everything.”

“Would you oppose God’s mercy?” she cried, misreading me.

“You do not love me enough to obey blindly, as that miserable Lady Dudley does?”

“Yes, yes, I will do all you ask,” she cried, goaded by jealousy.

“Then I stay,” I said, kissing her eyelids.

Frightened, she escaped my arms and walked home without looking back. I followed her; she was weeping and praying. We reached the lawn; I took and respectfully kissed her hand. This submission touched her.

“I am yours—forever, and as you will,” I said; “for I love you as your aunt loved you.”

She trembled and wrung my hand.

“One look,” I said, “one last of our old looks! The woman who gives herself wholly,” I cried, “gives less of life and soul than I have now received. Henriette, thou art my best-beloved—my only love.”

“I shall live!” she said; “but cure yourself as well.”

The look erased Arabella’s memory. Thus I was the plaything of two irreconcilable passions; I was influenced alternately. I loved an angel and a demon; two women equally beautiful—one adorned with virtues we decry through hatred of our imperfections, the other with vices we deify through selfishness. Returning down the avenue, seeing Madame de Mortsauf surrounded by her children waving handkerchiefs, I felt pride in being arbiter of two such destinies; proud of inspiring such great passions that death must come to whichever I abandoned. That passing conceit was doubly punished.

I do not know what demon prompted me to remain with Arabella and await the moment the count’s death might give me Henriette, for she would ever love me. Her harshness, tears, remorse, and Christian resignation testified to a feeling that could not be erased. Walking down that avenue, I was no longer twenty-five; I was fifty. A man passes quickly from youth to middle age. Perhaps these evil thoughts came from the Tuileries, from the king’s cabinet. Who could resist the polluting spirit of Louis XVIII?

When I reached the end of the avenue, I rushed back—Henriette was still there, alone. I went to bid her a last farewell, bathed in repentant tears, given, though unconsciously, to noble loves forever lost, to virgin emotions that cannot bloom again. Later, a man gives nothing; he receives; he loves himself in his mistress; but in youth he loves his mistress in himself. Woe to the man who has not had his Henriette. Woe to him who has never known a Lady Dudley. Joy to him who can find the two women in one.

After my return to Paris, Arabella and I became more intimate. We soon abandoned the conventional restrictions I had tried to keep—the external comedies and concealments that renew desire and protect the heart. Young passions, like youth, raze their forests instead of cutting timber. Arabella adopted none of these bourgeois strategies; she wished to exhibit me to all Paris as her “sposo.” She used her powers of seduction to keep me under her roof, not content with rumored scandal whispered behind fans. Seeing her happy in an imprudence that frankly admitted her position, how could I not believe her love?

But once plunged into the comforts of our illegal union, despair seized me; I saw my life bound to a course defying Henriette’s ideas and advice. From then on I lived in a rage like consumptives who, knowing death near, cannot bear scrutiny. There was no corner of my heart where I could escape suffering; an avenging spirit filled me with thoughts I dared not dwell on. My letters to Henriette depicted this moral malady and did her infinite harm. “At the cost of so many treasures lost, I wished you to be at least happy,” she wrote in the only answer I received. But I was not happy. Happiness is absolute; it admits no comparisons. Once first ardor fades, comparisons arise. All great passions first check character’s asperities; later, when lovers are accustomed, moral physiognomies reappear and natural antipathies surface. This period began with me. Less blinded, I undertook a critical examination of Lady Dudley that harmed her.

First, she lacked the qualities of mind that distinguish Frenchwomen. When a Frenchwoman loves, she metamorphoses: coquetry adorns love; she abandons dangerous vanity and claims no merit but loving well. She espouses her lover’s interests and acquires experience in a day; heedless and prodigal by nature, she manages with grace. She becomes mother, adviser, doctor, giving transformations a grace that reveals infinite love. She combines other nations’ special qualities and unifies them with wit that enlivens and varies love, relieving monotony. The Frenchwoman loves always, in public or solitude; in public she speaks by silence or looks; if speech and look fail, she finds other means. The Englishwoman, by contrast, makes her love bend to the world. Educated to icy manners, she opens and shuts her heart with a British mechanism. Passionate when no eye sees her, she is cold before the world. A lover doubts his empire seeing her immobility, her aloof countenance, the calm voice with which she leaves her boudoir. Hypocrisy becomes indifference; she has forgotten all.

A woman who can lay aside her love like a garment may be thought capable of changing it. What tempests in a man’s heart when he sees a woman take and drop her love like embroidery. These women, too completely mistress of themselves, never wholly belong to you; society’s influence prevents you reigning supreme. Where a Frenchwoman comforts with a look, an Englishwoman’s silence irritates and frets. They are so on their dignity that fashion often reigns over pleasures. An Englishwoman forces everything into form; Protestantism’s doubt and reasoning kill belief; it is the death of art and love. Passionate hearts flee worldliness.

You can understand my shock when I found Lady Dudley could not live without the world, and the English system of two lives was natural to her. When she loved, she loved madly—no woman could compare; but when the curtain fell, she banished memory of it. In public she never answered a look or smile; she was ambassadress-like, folding her phrases and elbows; her composure outraged my heart. She degraded love to a need rather than raising it to an ideal. She expressed neither fear nor regret nor desire; then, at a given hour, tenderness reappeared like a sudden fire.

Which of the two should I believe? By a thousand pin-pricks I felt the infinite differences between Henriette and Arabella. Madame de Mortsauf’s slightest departures reminded me of her: the sound of her gown, her lowered eyelids, her musical voice—a continual caress—her consistent thought. She did not halve her soul for two atmospheres. Arabella’s mind existed for the world, spent in sarcasm; she loved to rend and bite to satisfy craving. Madame de Mortsauf would have hidden her happiness; Lady Dudley chose to exhibit hers to all Paris yet kept an impenetrable English mask in public. This mixture of ostentation and dignity, love and coldness, wounded me. When I complained, she turned her tongue with triple sting, mingling boasts of love with cutting English sarcasms. In opposition she made amusement of hurting me, kneading me like dough. To any remark about keeping a medium, she caricatured my ideas. She asked if I wished her to kiss me at the opera before all Paris, seriously enough that I trembled she might. Despite passion, she was never meditative, self-contained, or reverent like Henriette; she was insatiable for excitement, noise, and celebrity; everything concerned herself, not me.

Henriette’s letter you have read—proof of how this virtuous woman obeyed the genius of a Frenchwoman—shows how she had studied my prospects, political relations, moral conquests, and with what ardor she took hold of my life in permissible directions. Lady Dudley affected the reticence of an acquaintance. She never informed herself about my affairs or likings as a man. Prodigal for herself without being generous, she separated self-interest and love too decidedly. I knew, without proving it, that to save me a pang, Henriette would have sought for me what she would never seek for herself. In any great misfortune I would have gone to Henriette for counsel; I would have been dragged to prison sooner than say a word to Lady Dudley.

The contrast extended to outward things. In France luxury expresses the man; it reproduces his ideas and gives attention value between lovers. English luxury, which at first allured by choiceness, proved mechanical. The thousand attentions at Clochegourde Arabella considered servants’ business; each had a duty as if horses. She never attached to servants; the death of the best would not affect her; money could replace him. Her selfishness was candid and created laughter. Crimson draperies covered an iron nature. The siren of amorous folly could make a young man forget the hard Englishwoman; only gradually I discovered the stony rock where my seeds were wasted. Madame de Mortsauf had seen this at a glance. She was right; Arabella’s love became intolerable to me. I have since remarked that many women who ride well have little tenderness. Like Amazons, they lack a breast; their hearts are hard in some direction.

When weariness took possession of me, when I comprehended the sanctity true feeling imparts to love, when memories of Clochegourde brought the fragrance of roses, the warmth of the terrace, and the warble of nightingales, I received a blow whose echo still wakes in my heart.

I was working in the king’s cabinet when the Duc de Lenoncourt entered. The king asked news of the countess. I raised my head hastily; the king, offended, gave me the look that precedes harsh words.

“Sire, my poor daughter is dying,” replied the duke.

“Will the king deign to grant me leave of absence?” I cried, tears in my eyes.

“Go, my lord,” he answered, withholding reprimand in satire.

More courtier than father, the duke asked no leave but got into the carriage with the king. I left without bidding Lady Dudley goodbye, leaving a note that I was sent on a mission by the king. At the Croix de Berny, I met his Majesty returning. He threw me an ironic look seeming to say: “If you mean to be anything in politics, come back; don’t parley with the dead.” The duke waved sadly. The pompous equipages rolled away to cries of “Vive le Roi!” It seemed the court had driven over the dead body of Madame de Mortsauf with utter insensibility. Though the duke was an excellent man, he would no doubt play whist with Monsieur after the king retired. The duchess had long ago given her daughter the first stab by writing of Lady Dudley.

My hurried journey was like a ruined gambler’s dream; I despaired at receiving no news. Had the confessor excluded me? I accused everyone. Beyond Tours, on the poplar-bordered road to Poncher, I met Monsieur Origet. He guessed I was going to Clochegourde and told me: “I doubt if you find her living. She is dying a frightful death—of inanition. When she called me last June, no medical power could control the disease; she had the symptoms Monsieur de Mortsauf knows, for he thinks he has them. Madame la comtesse was not in a transient condition; her disease had reached a point where science is useless; it is the incurable result of grief. Her physical condition is produced by inertia of an organ as necessary as the heart. Grief has done the work of a dagger. Don’t deceive yourself; she is dying of hidden grief.”

“Hidden!” I exclaimed.

“No,” he said, looking at me, “and since she was so seriously attacked, Monsieur de Mortsauf ceased to torment her. I am no longer needed; Monsieur Deslandes is all-sufficient; nothing can be done; her sufferings are dreadful. Young, beautiful, and rich, to die emaciated—for she dies of hunger! During the last forty days the stomach has rejected all nourishment.”

Origet pressed my hand with respect. “Courage, monsieur,” he said, lifting his eyes.

These words were like poisoned arrows. I sprang into the carriage and promised a reward if I arrived in time.

Despite impatience, the distance seemed short as bitter reflections crowded my soul. Dying of grief, yet her children were well? Then she died through me! My conscience arraigned me. What weakness in human justice, which avenges open deeds but forgives murderers of the soul! How many victims—Madame de Beauseant, the Duchesse de Langeais, Lady Brandon—our period teems with such events. Who does not remember the young woman who poisoned herself from jealousy? Society and science are accomplices in crimes without assizes. The world declares no one dies of grief; our scientific nomenclature provides labels that serve as passports to the coffin. Is there some law we do not know? Must the centenary pitilessly strew earth with corpses? My God! do I belong to the race of tigers?

Remorse gripped me as I entered Clochegourde’s avenue on a damp October morning. Jacques, Madeleine, and the Abbe Dominis knelt at the foot of a wooden cross. I sprang from the carriage toward them, my heart aching. The old huntsman stood apart.

I kissed Jacques and Madeleine, who gave a cold look. The abbe rose; I took him by the arm.

“Is she still alive?” I implored. He bowed sadly and said it might be better to wait; she was greatly changed. “It is necessary to prepare her for this interview, or it might increase her suffering—death would be a blessed release.”

He told me how for six months the countess had suffered more despite Origet’s care. The doctor had come every evening for two months. “To heal the body, the heart must first be healed,” the doctor had said. As the illness increased, the countess’s words grew bitter. She called on earth to keep her, then repented. Such alternations rend the heart. “She falls, but each time she stumbles she rises higher toward heaven,” he said.

I cried, “Surely this pure lily will flower in heaven?”

“You left her still a flower,” he answered. “You will find her consumed, purified, pure as a diamond buried in ashes.”

The count, white-headed, hurried out, declaring, “She was right! He is here! ‘Felix, Felix, Felix has come!’ she kept crying. My dear friend, death is here. Why did it not take a poor madman like me?”

I walked toward the house but the Abbe Birotteau stopped me. “Madame la comtesse begs you will not enter yet.” Inside, servants moved, all dumb with grief. Manette searched for Madeleine; we paced the lawn. I saw the dear “mignonne” gathering autumn flowers. Overcome, I sat, broken.

“Poor Felix,” said the count, “she forbade me to write to you. She knew how much you loved her.”

All was gloom. The servants wept; work was left undone; the place seemed uninhabited. The count, speaking in bursts, blamed and then wept for his wife, mixing despair with accusations. Madeleine told me her mother was ready; the Abbe Birotteau accompanied me. He warned, “I have done all to prevent this meeting. The salvation of this saint required it. I shall be present to protect you against yourself and perhaps against her. Respect her weakness. She is dying of hunger and thirst. Since morning she suffers feverish irritation. Pray God she die not in a moment of doubt.”

We reached the chamber. Henriette sat in white, before the fireplace, flowers about her. The abbe’s amazement at the room’s restored tenderness showed she had prepared to receive me. Her shrunken face had the greenish pallor of a magnolia; hollow eyes shone; her forehead kept proportion; inward fires issued despite waxy features. The smile on her whitened lips resembled death’s grin. Her robe showed emaciation. She knew she was changed; thought filled her with bitterness. No longer the sublime Madame de Mortsauf, she was a nameless thing struggling against annihilation. I took her dry, burning hand to kiss. Her discolored lips tried a smile—the forced smile of one seeking to hide irony, expectation, or fury.

“Ah, my poor Felix, this is death,” she said, “and you do not like death; odious death. This is the end of love; I knew it would be so. Lady Dudley will never see you thus surprised. Ah! why have I so longed for you, Felix? You have come at last, and I reward your devotion by the same horrible sight that made the Comte de Rance a Trappist. I, who hoped to remain beautiful and noble in your memory, destroy your illusions! True love cannot calculate. But stay; do not go, stay. Monsieur Origet said I was better this morning; I shall recover. Your looks will bring me back to life. When I regain strength and nourishment, I shall be beautiful again. I am scarcely thirty-five; there are many years of happiness before me—we will leave Clochegourde and go to Italy.”

Tears filled my eyes; I turned to the window. She put her burning lips to my ear: “My anguish has been in not seeing thee! Did you not bid me live? I will live; I will ride on horseback; I will know life, Paris, fêtes, pleasures!”

Those tones pictured a lifetime’s battles, the anguish of true love lost. The countess rose with the motion of a child. The confessor fell on his knees and prayed. She flung an arm around my neck, kissed me violently, and said, “You shall not escape me now!” She fainted; I laid her on the bed. “You carried me thus before,” she murmured.

Deslandes entered, surprised at the decorations. “We must suffer much to die,” she said faintly. The doctor felt a pulse and murmured that it was the forty-second day since she had eaten or drunk. The Abbe Birotteau took me to the garden. “Let us leave her to the doctor,” he said; “they will wrap her in opium. Well, you have heard her—if indeed it is she.”

“No,” I said, “it is not she.”

Stupefied, I hid in a punt to be alone. I tried to detach myself from my life—torture like that which afflicts adulterers. My life was a failure. Despair suggested to die beside her or bury myself at Meilleraye among Trappists. I looked at the windows where Henriette was dying, fancying I saw the light burning the night I betrothed my soul to hers. Ought I not to have followed the simple life she created, keeping faithful while I worked in the world? Had she not bidden me become great to be saved from shameful passions? Chastity! Love as Arabella understood it disgusted me.

Madeleine walked slowly and sat on a bench. When I approached, she rose and returned to the house, hating me; she fled from her mother’s murderer. At the portico Jacques sat, expressionless. Young persons carrying death are often unmoved at funerals. I longed to question Jacques.

“You know, Jacques,” I said, “that in me you have a most devoted brother.”

“Your friendship is useless; I shall follow my mother,” he replied with a sullen look.

He showed me his handkerchief stained with blood.

They each had a fatal secret. The brother and sister avoided each other. Henriette lay low; all was ruins at Clochegourde.

“Madame is asleep,” Manette said, happy that the countess was out of pain. Small joys matter then. “Monsieur Deslandes ordered the flowers taken away; they excited Madame’s nerves,” Manette added. She thought the flowers caused delirium.

I returned as the sunset gilded Azay’s roofs. All was calm and pure. A soft light lit the bed where my Henriette lay wrapped in opium. The body seemed annihilated; the soul reigned. Blanche and Henriette, two sublime faces of one woman, reappeared. The abbes sat at the bed. The count stood stupefied. I took a seat on the sofa. We exchanged looks of admiration mingled with tears. The Abbe Dominis and I communicated in signs: yes, angels were watching. Her face cleared; the green of suffering gave way to pure white pallor; she seemed to embrace the divine.

Madeleine knelt, adoring, crying “My mother!” Jacques smiled; he would follow her. “She is entering the haven,” said the Abbe Birotteau. The Angelus rang; Nature’s poetry joined the sacred hour. We burst into tears. Even servants knelt and prayed. The doctor signaled that this sleep was the hour without pain; it was time for the last sacraments. At nine o’clock she awoke quietly with gentle eyes, and we beheld her in former beauty.

“Mother! you are too beautiful to die—life and health are coming back to you!” cried Madeleine.

“Dear daughter, I shall live—in thee,” she answered, smiling.

They embraced. The count kissed his wife. She colored when she saw me.

“Dear Felix,” she said, “this is, I think, the only grief I have ever caused you. Forget all I may have said—I, a poor creature beside myself.” She held out her hand; I took and kissed it. “As in the old days, Felix?”

We left the room during the last confession. I approached Madeleine. In the presence of others she could not escape civility; but, like her mother, she looked at no one.

“Dear Madeleine,” I said softly, “what have you against me? Why such coldness before death, which should reconcile us?”

“I hear in my heart what my mother says,” she replied, with a look like Ingres’ “Mother of God.”

“And you condemn me when your mother absolves me—if indeed I am guilty.”

“You, you—always yourself!” Her voice revealed determined hatred, implacable as Corsican judgment.

An hour passed in silence. The Abbe Birotteau returned after receiving the countess’s confession. We found her sitting up, dressed in the long white garment to be her shroud. She had had her letters burned—sacrifice she had delayed until this hour. She smiled with eyes moist and inward lucidity; she saw the promised land.

“Dear Felix,” she said, pressing my hand, “stay with us. You must be present at my last scene; be not absent from the least painful among many things in which you are concerned.”

She made a sign and the door closed. She knelt before the astonished count, then laid her head on his knees.

“Though I have been a faithful wife to you,” she said faintly, “I have sometimes failed in my duty. I have given a friendship outside my family more affectionate care than to you. Perhaps I have irritated you by comparisons. I have had a deep friendship which no one—not even he who has been its object—has fully known. Though virtuous by human laws and an irreproachable wife, other thoughts, voluntary or involuntary, have crossed my mind, and in this hour I fear I welcomed them too warmly. But having loved you and continued submissive, I now pray for your blessing with a clean heart. I shall die without a bitter thought if I can hear a tender word for your Blanche, for the mother of your children—if you forgive her those things she did not forgive herself till reassured by the great tribunal which pardons all.”

“Blanche, Blanche!” cried the broken man, shedding tears on her head. “Would you kill me?” He raised and kissed her solemnly. “Have I no forgiveness to ask? Have I never been harsh?”

“Perhaps,” she said. “But dear friend, indulge a dying woman’s weakness; tranquillize me. Will you grant that I leave to our friend here that pledge of my affection?” She showed a letter on the mantel. “He is now my adopted son, and that is all. The heart makes bequests; my last wishes impose a duty on that dear Felix. If you do not wish to marry Madeleine, at least seek my soul’s repose by making Monsieur de Mortsauf as happy as he can be. Farewell, long farewell like that I gave last night to our valley, where I shall rest and where you will often—will you not?—return.

Henriette.”

I fell into abyssal reflections as the depths of her life were lighted by this expiring flame. My clouds of egotism rolled away. She had suffered as much as I—more, for she was dead. She believed others would be kind to her friend; she was blind to her daughter’s enmity. That last proof of tenderness pained me. Poor Henriette wished to give me Clochegourde and her daughter.

From that dread day when I first followed my noble Henriette to the grave, the sun has been less warm, nights more gloomy, movement less agile, thought more dull. Some departed we bury in earth; others are buried within us, their memory mingling with our heartbeats; they are in us by a metempsychosis of love. A soul is within my soul. When some good thing is done by me, that soul acts and speaks. All that is good within me issues from that grave; sarcasm and bitterness are mine. Natalie, when next my eyes are darkened or my lips silent, do not ask, “Of what are you thinking?”

I ceased writing for days; these memories were too bitter. I owe you an account of events that followed; they need few words. Henriette’s letter set a star of hope before me. To live at Clochegourde with Madeleine, consecrating my life to her, seemed a rescue. But it was necessary to know her true feelings. As I bade the count farewell, we walked the terrace. He spoke of his loss but soon of the future; he feared his daughter, who lacked her mother’s gentleness. Madeleine’s firm character alarmed him; he foresaw a struggle between father and daughter that would end his days in bitterness. His son was to leave; his daughter marry; what son-in-law might she have? Though talking of dying, he feared being alone without sympathy.

Madeleine could see me from the terrace but would not come down. I seized a moment to beg the count to call her, saying I had a last wish of her mother to convey. The count fetched her and left us on the terrace alone.

“Dear Madeleine,” I said, “if I speak to you, it should be here where your mother listened to me. I know your thoughts; but are you not condemning me without knowledge of facts? My life and happiness are bound up in this place; you know that, yet you seek to banish me by coldness instead of brotherly affection that death should have strengthened. If my mother’s name still has power, in her name I beg you never to return me to Clochegourde so long as you are in it. The sight of me causes a repugnance I cannot express, which I shall never overcome.”

She stopped me.

“Monsieur,” she said, voice trembling, “I know all your thoughts; but I shall not change my feelings. I would rather fling myself into the Indre than ally myself to you. If my mother’s name has power, in her name I beg you never to return while I am here. The sight of you causes repugnance I cannot overcome.”

She bowed with dignity and returned to the house without looking back. The searching eye of that young girl had discovered her mother’s secrets; her hatred of the man she fancied fatal to her mother may have been increased by a sense of complicity.

All before me was chaos. Madeleine hated me without considering cause or victim. The edifice of my happiness fell in ruins. I alone knew the life of that unknown woman; none had fathomed her heart. Strange truth: how many families have their Henriette! How many noble feelings leave earth with no historian to measure their depths! Mothers know their children little; so with husbands, lovers, brothers. When Madeleine disappeared, I left with a broken heart. Bidding farewell to my host at Sache, I started for Paris, following the right bank of the Indre.

################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################