“HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!”

This exclamation came from a lawyer’s clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper—a messenger—who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

“Come, Simonnin, don’t play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!” said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

The lawyer’s messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and billets-doux keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

“If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?” asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

“What trick can we play that cove?” said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

Then he improvised:

“But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth”—(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned—you, as you engross it!)—“when he resumed the reins of Government, understood”—(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)—“the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!”—(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)—“and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents”—[‘numerous’ is flattering, and ought to please the Bench]—“all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in”—Stop,” said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, “that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.—Well,” he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, “well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!”

And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating—“given in—Are you ready?”

“Yes,” cried the three writers.

It all went together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

“Given in—Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our i’s and cross our t’s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages.”

“By Jingo!” repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

“What! have you written by Jingo?” cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

“Why, yes,” said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor’s copy, “he has written, ‘We must dot our i’s’ and spelt it by Gingo!”

All the clerks shouted with laughter.

“Why! Monsieur Hure, you take ‘By Jingo’ for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!” exclaimed Simonnin.

“Scratch it cleanly out,” said the head clerk. “If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the ‘Shoulder arms!’ of the law.”

“Given in—in?” asked Godeschal.—“Tell me when, Boucard.”

“June 1814,” replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, “Come in!”

Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers—broutilles (odds and ends) in French law jargon—and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk’s cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk’s table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,—all the glory of a lawyer’s office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine—neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of remainders, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to Chlet)—a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients—something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities—an attorney’s office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man’s soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

“Where is my penknife?”

“I am eating my breakfast.”

“You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy.”

“Silence, gentlemen!”

These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

“Monsieur, is your master at home?”

The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, “I am deaf.”

“What do you want, sir?” asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

“This is the fifth time I have called,” replied the victim. “I wish to speak to M. Derville.”

“On business?”

“Yes, but I can explain it to no one but—”

“M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to—”

The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers’ clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

“Monsieur,” said the old man, “as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up.”

Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

“It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning.” The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in “parties,” went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

“I will come again to-night,” said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

“What do you think of that for a cracked pot?” said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

“He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again,” said a clerk.

“He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay,” said the head clerk.

“No, he is a retired concierge,” said Godeschal.

“I bet you he is a nobleman,” cried Boucard.

“I bet you he has been a porter,” retorted Godeschal. “Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body’s. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch.”

“He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch,” cried Desroches. “It has been known!”

“No,” Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, “I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic.”

“I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier,” said Godeschal.

“Done with you,” answered Boucard.

“Monsieur! Monsieur!” shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

“What are you at now, Simonnin?” asked Boucard.

“I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know.”

All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

“What can we say to him?” cried Godeschal.

“Leave it to me,” replied Boucard.

The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

“Monsieur,” said Boucard, “will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know—”

“Chabert.”

“The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?” asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

“The same, monsieur,” replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

“Whew!”

“Done brown!”

“Poof!”

“Oh!”

“Boum!”

“Ting-a-ring-ting!”

“Sold again!”

“Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying,” said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopoeia of the language would fail to represent.

“Which theatre shall we go to?”

“To the opera,” cried the head clerk.

“In the first place,” said Godeschal, “I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui.”

“Madame Saqui is not the play.”

“What is a play?” replied Godeschal. “First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen—”

“But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!” cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

“To be seen for money,” Godeschal added.

“But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective,” said Desroches.

“But do listen to me!”

“You are talking nonsense, my dear boy,” said Boucard.

“Is Curtius’ a play?” said Godeschal.

“No,” said the head clerk, “it is a collection of figures—but it is a spectacle.”

“I bet you a hundred francs to a sou,” Godeschal resumed, “that Curtius’ Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy.”

“And so on, and so forth!” said Simonnin.

“You mind I don’t box your ears!” said Godeschal.

The clerks shrugged their shoulders.

“Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us,” he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. “On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients.”

“Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow,” said Boucard. “To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!”

“If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?” said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal’s.

“Since nothing is settled,” said Boucard, “let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in ‘Nero.’ Simonnin may go to the pit.”

And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

“Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen (in words),” said Godeschal. “Ready?”

“Yes,” replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

“And we hope that my lords on the Bench,” the extemporizing clerk went on. “Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself.”

“Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines,” said Boucard.

“We hope,” Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, “that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth—”

“Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn’t you like a glass of water?” said the little messenger.

“That imp of a boy!” said Boucard. “Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides.”

“Here set forth,” Godeschal went on. “Add in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse (at full length) de Grandlieu.”

“What!” cried the chief, “are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor—a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of ‘inasmuch,’ and go to the Courts myself.”

This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, “Those were good times.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the
door of Maître Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the
Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had
not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown
upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding
his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at
finding the head clerk busily arranging on his master’s dining-room
table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The
clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take
a seat, which the client did.

“On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you
named such an hour for an interview,” said the old man, with the forced
mirth of a ruined man who does his best to smile.

“The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too,” replied
the man, going on with his work. “M. Derville chooses this hour for
studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how
to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect
is freer at this hour—the only time when he can have the silence and
quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the
profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation
at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case,
read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business,
then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the
morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he
spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into
society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for
undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying
his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his
art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his
life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money.”

As he listened the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an
expression so bereft of intelligence that the clerk, after looking at
him, thought no more about him.

A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk
opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers.
The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim
light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as
absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius’ collection
to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This
quiescence would not have been surprising if it had not completed the
supernatural aspect of the man’s whole person. The old soldier was dry
and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed
wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a
transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl
with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His
face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, was as the face of the dead.
Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in
shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head due to
some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by
Rembrandt. The brim of the hat which covered the old man’s brow cast a
black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This effect threw
into relief the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of
the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the
figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a look of
melancholy madness and the deteriorating symptoms of senility, giving
the face an ill-starred appearance which no human words could render.

But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this
stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had
worn into this face like drops of water on fine marble. A physician,
an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama in its sublime
horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques
artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of a lithographic
stone.

On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill
that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful
reverie. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow; the leather
lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without
his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly
disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over
the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal
of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two
lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven
skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was,
“His intelligence must have escaped through that cut.”

“If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!”
thought Boucard.

“Monsieur,” said Derville, “to whom have I the honor of speaking?”

“To Colonel Chabert.”

“Which?”

“He who was killed at Eylau,” replied the old man.

On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each
other, as much as to say, “He is mad.”

“Monsieur,” the Colonel went on, “I wish to confide to you the secret of
my position.”

Notably, lawyers are naturally intrepid. Whether from the habit of
receiving many persons, from feeling protected by the law, or from
confidence in their mission, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing,
like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

“During the day, sir,” said the attorney, “I am not so miserly of my
time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise.
Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I
may consider necessary. Speak.”

Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at
the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he
turned over the bundles of papers.

“You know, perhaps,” said the dead man, “that I commanded a cavalry
regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat’s
famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is
a historical fact, recorded in Victoires et Conquêtes, where it is
related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which
at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the
movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor,
after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the
enemy’s cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers,
perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut
across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap
I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse.
Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men,
fifteen hundred of them—there might have been more! My death was
announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution—he was fond of me—
wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank
for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and
bring me into hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, ‘Go and see
whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.’ These rascally
saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of
two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse,
and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was
probably made out in accordance with the rules of military
jurisprudence.”

As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and
relate a story so probable though strange, the young lawyer ceased
fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his
head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

“Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud,” he
said, interrupting the speaker, “Colonel Chabert’s widow?”

“My wife—yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts
to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to
come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the
present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things
must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain
circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me
to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must
presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state
analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise
how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the
custom in time of war, and thrown into the common grave by the men
ordered to bury the dead?

“Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till
after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At
Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This
dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will
tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling
me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded.
Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As
I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body
of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a
ball.

“When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere
of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. The little
air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room.
I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was
the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I
understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die.
This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused
me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard—or I thought I
heard, I will assert nothing—groans from the world of dead among whom I
was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though
the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very
indistinct, in spite of impressions of far more acute suffering I was
fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

“But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such
as I have never known elsewhere—literally, the silence of the grave.
At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant
space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure
the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would
seem that, thanks to the carelessness and haste with which we had been
pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against
each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is
building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time
for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules!
A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unlooked-for help,
I must have perished. With a fury you may imagine, I began to work my
way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which
had no doubt been thrown over us—I say us, as if there had been others
living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I
do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which
formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms.
This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air
between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw
daylight, but through snow!

“At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my
blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse,
had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of
it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow.
However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when
I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole,
where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so
I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields
yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of
the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the
moment for saying, ‘Respect courage in misfortune!’ In short, monsieur,
after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy,
of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans
flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug
out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my
head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground
like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them
they got me to their poor hovel.

“It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy—allow me
to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which,
from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect
of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not
speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me
admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

“You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave
as naked as I came from my mother’s; so that six months afterwards,
when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert,
and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather
more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the
ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional
pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his
patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man,
named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his
country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped
from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been
found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of
my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

“Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence,
nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to
establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that
town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond,
begging my bread, treated as a madman when I told my story, without
ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds
which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My
sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little
town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he
was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert.
For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages
which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart
as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample
reason for shutting a man up.

“At the end of two years’ detention, which I was compelled to submit to,
after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, ‘Here is a poor man who
thinks he is Colonel Chabert’ to people who would reply, ‘Poor fellow!’
I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew
melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel
Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh,
monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I—”

Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study,
which Derville respected.

“One fine day,” his visitor resumed, “one spring day, they gave me the
key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked
quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel
Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I
hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me.
If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could
be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name,
no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field-Marshal in
Austria or Russia. Who knows?”

“Monsieur,” said the attorney, “you have upset all my ideas. I feel as
if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you.”

“You are the only person,” said the Colonel, with a melancholy look,
“who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to
lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary
documents to begin my lawsuit—”

“What lawsuit?” said the attorney, who had forgotten his client’s
painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

“Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty
thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a
sou. When I tell lawyers these things—men of sense; when I propose—I,
a beggar—to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I—a dead
man—bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage
and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold
politeness which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless
wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler
or a madman—it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the
dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts,
under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!”

“Pray resume your narrative,” said Derville.

“‘Pray resume it!’” cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer’s
hand. “That is the first polite word I have heard since—”

The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing eloquence
in his eyes, gesture, even silence, entirely convinced Derville and
touched him deeply.

“Listen, monsieur,” said he; “I have this evening won three hundred
francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man
happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain
the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you
five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the
smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his
fortune to make. Proceed.”

The Colonel sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his
woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in
pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps
it was in obedience to the latent germ in every man’s heart—to the
passion for glory which prompts expansion by deeds or ideas. In his mind
the Ego was now but a secondary object. The young lawyer’s words were
as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by
justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer’s office the
ten gold pieces so long refused him by so many people and in so many
ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for
fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured.
There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us like
a thunderbolt and burn us. The poor man’s gratitude was too great to
find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville
saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found
his voice.

“Where was I?” said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a
soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier,
and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in
France.

“At Stuttgart. You were out of prison,” said Derville.

“You know my wife?” asked the Colonel.

“Yes,” said Derville, with a bow.

“What is she like?”

“Still quite charming.”

The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some
secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation characteristic of
men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

“Monsieur,” said he, with a sort of cheerfulness—for he breathed again,
the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave—“Monsieur, if I
had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have
befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with
the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere
at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for
a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a
face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a sans-culotte. I was more like
an Esquimaux than a Frenchman—I, who had formerly been considered one
of the smartest of fops in 1799!—I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

“Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a
dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier’s
name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of
broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; though I
recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a
tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin’s mouth
opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a
mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known.
It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was then
unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former
friends!

“I had once saved Boutin’s life, but it was only the repayment of a
debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was
at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed
was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but,
like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain
details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I
recalled them his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of
my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me,
were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor
eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his
Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered
triumphantly.

“He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my
own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had
tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe
of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon’s first abdication. That news
was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

“We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as
pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to
shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland,
Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only
thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies.
Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go
to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in
which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert.
That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps
nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I
am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage,
whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose
only protector is the Almighty.—Nay, I am wrong! I had a father—the
Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see _his
Chabert_, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he
would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all
out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my
wife’s silence!

“Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably
trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the
pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when
we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with
him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the
head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have
ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar.
Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless
excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as
I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an
entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of
bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to
every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me.
I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been
forced to endure! ‘Boutin must be dead!’ I told myself, and in fact the
poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by
mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

“At last I entered Paris—with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on
grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no
shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were
in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac
in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an
attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing
the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an
ironmonger’s shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hôtel-Dieu.
There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned
out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones
of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du
Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me!
Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin; I
could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators
had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had
married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

“At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of
my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to
a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the
administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife’s
marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was
Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying
another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of
Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur,
knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with
hope.—Well,” said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury,
“when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day
when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

“To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early
morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of
her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed
past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the
woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have
lived for vengeance!” cried the old man in a hollow voice, suddenly
standing in front of Derville. “She knows that I am alive; since my
return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me
no more!—I—I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and
curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness;
well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do
not know what will become of me!”

With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained
motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

“It is a serious business,” he said at length, mechanically. “Even
granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg,
it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go
before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over
with a clear head; it is quite exceptional.”

“Oh,” said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, “if I
fail, I can die—but not alone.”

The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy,
lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

“We must perhaps compromise,” said the lawyer.

“Compromise!” echoed Colonel Chabert. “Am I dead, or am I alive?”

“I hope, monsieur,” the attorney went on, “that you will follow my
advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take
in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the
moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order
fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here
to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no
man’s mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates
to recover; you are rich.”

This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man’s eyes. Derville
rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show
emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed
letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his
hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

“Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the
name of the town, and in what kingdom?” said the lawyer.

The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the
names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville,
and held out the other—a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

“On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall
owe most. You are a splendid fellow!”

The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel’s, saw him to the stairs,
and held a light for him.

“Boucard,” said Derville to his head clerk, “I have just listened to a
tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall
not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor
of the day.”

When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two
twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment
under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

“I may smoke cigars!” he said to himself.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
About three months after this interview, in Derville’s room at night, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville’s account to his eccentric client came to consult the attorney and begged him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

“Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?” said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

“I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair,” replied Derville. “My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty-five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism.”

As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers Boucard had laid out. His eye was struck by the stamps in red and blue ink which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

“Ah ha!” he laughed, “here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!”

He opened the letter; it was in German.

“Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately,” said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, perfectly regular, duly witnessed, and legally stamped. He added that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

“This looks like business,” cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. “But look here, my boy,” he went on, addressing the notary, “I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?”

“We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin,” interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

“Well, was it not that ill-used man who just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients’ money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert’s estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud.”

“Yes,” said Crottat. “It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollection, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at his death, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury.”

“So that Comte Chabert’s personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?”

“Consequently so it was, old fellow!” said Crottat. “You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other.”

Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were too deep for cab wheels. Looking about on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, “Vergniaud, dairyman.” To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, painted in white. The gate was open, and doubtless remained so all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels in the neighborhood of Paris, unlike the most wretched country dwellings; they have poverty without poetry.

Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found legitimate use; they had been collected from various demolitions. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, “Fancy Goods.” The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall, seeming more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes; the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough boards overlapped and shabbily thatched with rushes.

Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags used to clean them fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat munched the shoots of a starved vine clinging to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, licked them over. The fowls, scared by Derville’s approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

“And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!” said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the squalid scene.

The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, hoping they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity. Derville repeated his questions, without success. Provoked by their saucy cunning, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely-colored pipe--a humble, short clay pipe called “brule-queule.” He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join him, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

“Silence in the ranks!”

The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

“Why did you not write to me?” he said to Derville. “Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there,” he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer’s hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel’s bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread a few fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating saltpeter, green with mould and full of cracks, were so damp that on the side where the Colonel’s bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the Bulletins de la Grande Armée, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel’s reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit from Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

“Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?” he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

“But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!”

The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the experience they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

“Here,” said he to himself, “is a man who has, of course, spent my money in satisfying a trooper’s three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!”

“To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----” And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--“I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace.”

Derville reflected there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums he had advanced, so he merely said:

“But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, and been better lodged?”

“Why,” replied the Colonel, “the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me gratis for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old Egyptian--”

“An Egyptian!”

“We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read.”

“He might have lodged you better for your money,” said Derville.

“Bah!” said the Colonel, “his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune... However, it does very well.”

“Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!”

“Curse the money! To think I haven’t got any!” he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

“Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business,” said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

“To me,” said the soldier, “it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau.”

“Things are not done so in the legal world,” said Derville. “Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

“In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets.”

“And my fortune?”

“Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?”

“Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?”

“My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals.”

“That is true.”

“Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs.”

“And you call that justice!” said the Colonel, in dismay.

“Why, certainly--”

“A pretty kind of justice!”

“So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor.”

“But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----”

“I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to.”

“That would be to sell my wife!”

“With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in your position, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice.”

“Let us go together.”

“What, just as you are?” said the lawyer. “No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot.”

“Can I possibly gain it?”

“On every count,” replied Derville. “But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor.”

“To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that,” said he simply.

“Well, until then,” Derville went on, “will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it.”

Large tears gathered in the poor veteran’s faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

“I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!” he cried. “I will call out: ‘I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!’--The statue--he--he will know me.”

“And you will find yourself in Charenton.”

At this terrible name the soldier’s transports collapsed.

“And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?”

“The war office!” said Derville. “Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire.”

The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

“Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests.”

“Do what you will,” said Chabert.

“Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death.”

“Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?”

“That is not my view of it,” said the lawyer. “We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud’s intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension.”

“Well, proceed then,” said Chabert. “I put myself entirely in your hands.”

“I will send you a power of attorney to sign,” said Derville. “Good-bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me.”

Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer’s hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him except with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer’s; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

“Asking your pardon, sir,” said he, taking Derville by the arm, “if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General’s.”

“And what then?” replied Derville. “What concern have you with him?--But who are you?” said the cautious lawyer.

“I am Louis Vergniaud,” he replied at once. “I have a few words to say to you.”

“So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?”

“Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think?--Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it’s neighbors’ fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings.”

“He?”

“Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, ‘Really, General----’ ‘Bah!’ says he, ‘I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.’--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados--Do you know him, sir?”

“But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you.”

“He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it’s just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----”

Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

“On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!” thought he.

“All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure.”

“And will that be soon?”

“Why, yes.”

“Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!” and the cowkeeper’s tanned face seemed to expand.

“Now,” said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, “let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but...”

And he set to work to study the Countess’ position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves when concocting plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer’s cleverness.

Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old Parlement of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon’s blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor’s advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

The Emperor fell.

At the time of Comte Chabert’s death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband’s fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband’s will; but Napoleon’s hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count’s marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

Then came the Restoration. The Count’s political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the “Gulf of Revolution should be closed”--for this phrase of the King’s, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer’s preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master’s influence, and he made the Count’s fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness most women possess, understood the man’s motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess’ abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress’ capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess’ greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert’s widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

A speech he made, apropos of Talleyrand’s marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess’ heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband’s return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

“There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud’s position,” said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. “How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the paire by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the Parlement is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King’s great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess,” thought he as he went up the steps.

Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert’s wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

“The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them.”

A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

“Good-morning, Monsieur Derville,” said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

“Madame,” said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. “I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter.”

“I am so grieved, M. le Comte is away--”

“I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count.”

“Then I will send for Delbecq,” said she.

“He would be of no use to you, clever as he is,” replied Derville. “Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!”

“Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?” said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

“Madame,” he said with cold and piercing solemnity, “you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point.”

“What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?”

“Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second.”

“It is false,” she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. “I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come.”

“Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease,” said he coolly, finding it amusing to lash up the Countess’ rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. “Well, then, we must fight it out,” thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

“The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--”

“Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not.”

“Then you received the letter,” said Derville, smiling. “You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----”

The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, “Since you are the so-called Chabert’s attorney, be so good as to--”

“Madame,” said Derville, “I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert’s. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening.”

“Nay, speak on, monsieur,” said she graciously.

“Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you.”

“But, monsieur,” said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, “even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert.”

“It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you.”

“And who is he?”

“Comte Ferraud.”

“Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--”

“Do not talk of such absurd things,” interrupted Derville, “to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annul your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--”

“He would defend me, monsieur.”

“No, madame.”

“What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?”

“That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King.”

The Countess turned pale.

“A hit!” said Derville to himself. “I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel’s case is won.”--“Besides, madame,” he went on aloud, “he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife’s returning to him--”

“Enough, enough, monsieur!” she exclaimed. “I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?”

“Compromise!” said Derville.

“Does he still love me?” she said.

“Well, I do not think he can do otherwise.”

The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps she could speculate on her first husband’s affection to gain her cause by feminine cunning.

“I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise,” said Derville, taking leave.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
A week after Derville’s two visits, on a fine June morning the husband and wife, separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from opposite ends of Paris to meet in the lawyer’s office engaged by both. The supplies Derville had advanced enabled Colonel Chabert to dress suitably; the dead man arrived in a decent cab, wearing a wig that suited him, blue cloth and white linen, and the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor under his waistcoat. Resuming the habits of wealth had brought back his soldierly bearing; his grave, mysterious face reflected his happiness and hopes and seemed to have recovered youth and vigor. He no longer resembled the Chabert of the old box-coat; a passerby would at once have recognized one of the noble wrecks of the old army.

When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville’s office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a simple dress cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was; a drawn bonnet lined with pink framed her face and softened its outlines.

The office remained unchanged. Simonnin, breakfasting by the open window, stared at the blue sky above the courtyard.

“Ah, ha! Who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?” cried the little clerk.

“The chief is a great magician,” said Godeschal.

“Then there is no trick to play on him this time?” asked Desroches.

“His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud,” said Boucard.

“Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?” Godeschal joked.

“Here she is,” answered Simonnin.

Chabert pinched the gutter-jumper’s ear, to the clerks’ amusement. He was in Derville’s private room when the Countess entered the office.

“I have placed you apart,” Derville told her, “not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert. If, however, you wish it—”

“It is an attention for which I am obliged to you.”

Derville had drawn up a memorandum of an agreement for them to discuss. He read aloud: the preamble named Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, living in Paris, and Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the said Comte Chabert; it proposed that she and Chabert acknowledge, before witnesses and notaries, that the person designated is her first husband, and that Chabert would assert his rights only under certain circumstances—failure to carry out the conditions of their secret agreement. Chabert would accept a friendly suit to annul his certificate of death and dissolve the marriage. By a subsequent clause she pledged to secure Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock, to revert to her at his death.

“But it is much too dear!” exclaimed the Countess.

“Can you compromise it?” asked Derville.

“Possibly. But what do you want, madame?”

“I want—I will not have a lawsuit. I want—”

“You want him to remain dead?” interrupted Derville.

“Monsieur,” said the Countess, “if twenty-four thousand francs are necessary, we will go to law—”

“Yes, we will go to law,” said the Colonel in a deep voice, opening the door and standing before his wife, one hand in his waistcoat, the other hanging by his side—an attitude made ominous by his adventure.

“It is he,” the Countess thought to herself.

“Too dear!” the old soldier exclaimed. “I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you—you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved—”

“But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!” cried the Countess with feigned astonishment.

“Indeed!” said the old man with intense irony. “Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais-Royal—”

The Countess turned pale. Chabert paused, touched by the pain he caused the woman he had once loved; but her venomous glance made him continue abruptly: “You were with La—”

“Allow me, Monsieur Derville,” said the Countess. “You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things.”

She left. Derville rushed after her, but she had already gone.

Back in his private room, the Colonel paced in a towering rage.

“In those times a man took his wife where he chose,” he said. “But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted appearances. She has no heart.”

“Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch,” Derville warned. “Besides you might miss! A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife. Let me set things straight; go now. Take care of yourself; she may set a trap and shut you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you.”

The Colonel obeyed and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly descended the dark staircase, crushed by the most cruel blow—his wife's recognition of him without acknowledgment of identity—when he heard a rustle on the lowest landing and she stood before him.

“Come, monsieur,” she said, taking his arm with a familiar gesture. Her action and recovered gracious tone allayed his wrath, and he allowed her to lead him to the carriage.

“Well, get in!” she said when the footman let down the step.

As if by magic he found himself sitting beside her.

“Where to?” asked the servant.

“To Groslay,” she answered.

They drove across Paris. “Monsieur,” said the Countess in a voice trembling with a rare emotion—this single word expressed reproach and pardon, hope and despair, a question and an answer—“I knew you at once.”

“Rosine,” said the old soldier, “those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes.”

Two hot tears rolled onto her hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

“Could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false?” she asked. “If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in privacy. You will forgive me, I hope. I received your letters, but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing unrecognizable; after obtaining Napoleon’s signature to my second marriage contract, I believed some swindler wanted to make a fool of me. To avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud and family ties, I took precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right?”

“Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot,” he admitted. “But where are we going?” noticing they had reached La Chapelle.

“To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There we will consider the steps to be taken. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? Let us preserve our dignity. You still love me,” she said sadly, “but have I not been authorized to form other ties? A secret voice bids me trust your kindness. Be judge and party to the suit. I love M. Ferraud. I believed I had a right to love him. I do not blush to confess it; I do not disgrace us. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother.”

The Colonel waved her silence away; for a long stretch they rode without speaking. Chabert imagined the two little ones before him.

“Rosine.”

“Monsieur?”

“The dead are very wrong to come to life again.”

“Oh, monsieur, no! Do not think me ungrateful. You find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter.”

“Rosine,” he said in a softened tone, “I no longer feel resentment. We will forget. I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me.”

The Countess gave him a look of deep gratitude that overwhelmed him. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion; his whole reward was the assurance he had made her happy.

“My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested,” she said.

They conversed, recalling their former life and the Empire, and she lent a tinge of melancholy that kept the talk serious. She revived his love without awakening desire and allowed him to see her mental resources while guiding him to moderate his pleasure to paternal affection. He found in her a Countess of the Restoration.

By a cross-road they reached the entrance to a large park in the valley between Margency and Groslay. The Countess had a delightful house prepared for his stay. Misfortune had made the Colonel more helpful and good; though trusting, he could not help asking, “Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?”

“Yes,” she said, “if I found Colonel Chabert among Derville’s clients.”

Her plausible reply calmed his slight remaining suspicion. For three days she was charming, with tender attentions and unfailing sweetness, apparently anxious to wipe out his sufferings and earn forgiveness for wrongs she confessed to have caused innocently. She delighted in showing the charms he liked while assuming a kind of melancholy to appeal to his feelings and take possession of his mind.

She did not yet know precisely what to do with him but meant to annihilate him socially. On the third evening uneasy at the results of her maneuvers, she finished a letter to Delbecq, instructing him to demand the deeds from Derville in her name, copy them, and come to Groslay. She had scarcely finished when she heard the Colonel’s step; uneasy at her absence, he came to look for her.

“Alas! I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable...”

“Why, what is the matter?” he asked.

“Nothing,” she replied, and went to speak privately to her maid, sending her to Paris to deliver the letter to Delbecq and bring it back as soon as read. The Countess then sat on a bench in sight to be joined by the Colonel. He hurried and sat beside her.

“Rosine,” he said, “what is the matter with you?”

She did not answer. The June evening was calm and lovely; distant children’s voices added sweetness. “You do not answer me?” he said.

“My husband—” the Countess broke off, blushed, and asked, “What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?”

“Call him your husband,” Chabert replied gently. “Is he not the father of your children?”

“If he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out I came here alone with a stranger, what am I to say? Decide my fate; I am resigned.”

“My dear,” said the Colonel, taking her hands, “I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness—”

“That is impossible!” she cried, convulsively. “Remember you would have to renounce your identity, in an authenticated form.”

“Is not my word enough?” he asked. The demand for authentication pierced him and aroused distrust; he looked at her in a way that made her color.

A child cried in the distance. “Jules, leave your sister in peace,” the Countess called. “What, are your children here?” he asked.

“Yes, but I told them not to trouble you.”

He understood the delicacy and took her hand to kiss it. “But let them come,” he said. Two children ran up, complaining and holding out their hands. The Countess, no longer restraining her tears, cried, “Poor little things! I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother’s heart cannot be divided; I want them.”

“Are you making mamma cry?” Jules asked, glaring at the Colonel.

“Silence, Jules!” said the mother. The children stood speechless, curious.

“If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything...” she cried.

“That is decisive,” said Chabert. “I must return underground. I had told myself so already.”

“Can I accept such a sacrifice?” she asked. “To sign that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to live a lie every hour! But for my children I would have fled with you to the other end of the world.”

“Cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but tobacco and the Constitutionnel.”

The Countess melted; a contest of generosity ensued between them, and the soldier prevailed. One evening, bewitched by the domestic picture, he resolved to remain dead, and, no longer frightened by the authentication of a deed, asked what he could do to secure the family’s happiness.

“Do exactly as you like,” she said. “I declare I will have nothing to do with this affair.”

Delbecq had arrived days before and, following the Countess’s orders, had gained the Colonel’s confidence. The next morning Chabert went with the intendant to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had a notary draw up an affidavit. After hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

“Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!” he cried.

“Indeed, monsieur,” said Delbecq, “I should advise you to get at least thirty thousand francs a year. Madame would pay.”

The insulted Colonel slapped the scoundrel’s cheeks twice and rushed off. Stung and confused, he returned to the park at Groslay by a gap in the fence and sat to meditate in a little room under a gazebo that commanded the road to Saint-Leu. The Countess, in the upper room, did not hear him approach. She and Delbecq discussed how to get him into Charenton if necessary.

The Colonel, recovering youthful elasticity, leaped the haha and stood before Delbecq, giving him two fine slaps. His rage spent, he no longer felt vigorous enough to leap back; he had seen the truth in its nakedness. The Countess’ words and Delbecq’s reply had exposed the conspiracy intended to entrap him. The care shown him had been bait for a snare. The revelation brought back all his suffering; he felt disgust for life and indecision.

At last he went up into the kiosque and found his wife seated, calm but shuddering slightly when she saw him. He stood with folded arms, face pale, brow stern.

“Madame,” he said after a moment’s gaze that compelled her to blush, “I do not curse you—I scorn you. I can thank the chance that divided us. I do not desire revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of sunshine. Farewell!”

The Countess threw herself at his feet and would have detained him by his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust: “Do not touch me!”

Her expression when he left showed an infernal perspicacity: she knew she might live in peace on his word and contempt.

Chabert disappeared. The dairyman failed and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel perhaps took up some similar industry, or fell from ledge to ledge, lost in the mire of rags of Paris.

Six months later, Derville, hearing nothing of Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed they had compromised through some other lawyer. One morning he summed the advances he had made to Chabert with costs, and asked the Countess to claim the amount from M. le Comte Chabert, assuming she knew where to find her first husband.

The next day Comte Ferraud’s man of business, newly appointed President of the County Court, sent Derville a note:

“Monsieur,—Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he came forward under false pretences. Yours, etc., DELBECQ.”

“One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half,” cried Derville. “They don’t deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand-franc notes!”

Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader employed in the Police Court. By chance he entered Court Number 6 just as the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months’ imprisonment as a vagabond, followed by confinement in the Mendicity House of Detention. On hearing the name, Derville recognized the delinquent between two gendarmes as his false Colonel Chabert.

The old soldier sat placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In rags and misery, his face still showed noble pride and a stoical eye. When a man falls into the hands of justice, he becomes a mere matter of law.

Taken back to the lock-up to be removed with the other vagabonds at the bar, Derville used his privilege to follow him. The lock-up was a dark, malodorous ante-room where the wretches of the city gathered. The sight justified, in the eyes of any observer, the desperation that pushes many to suicide.

Colonel Chabert sat among men in the livery of misery, silent or speaking low, while three gendarmes paced. “Do you recognize me?” Derville asked, standing before him.

“Yes, sir,” said Chabert, rising.

“If you are an honest man,” Derville whispered, “how could you remain in my debt?”

The old soldier blushed as a young girl accused of a clandestine affair might.

“What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?” Derville cried.

“Paid me?” said Derville. “She wrote to me that you were a swindler.”

Chabert cast up his eyes in sublime horror and imprecation, as if calling heaven to witness to the new subterfuge.

“Monsieur,” he said in a calm, husky voice, “get the gendarmes to allow me into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored.”

On Derville’s word the sergeant allowed it, and Hyacinthe wrote a few lines addressed to the Comtesse Ferraud.

“Send her that,” said the soldier, “and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is no less sincere here,” and he laid his hand on his heart. “But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all.”

Derville went away. Returning to his office, he sent Godeschal to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert’s lawyer.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal’s staff among beggars by living at Bicetre as poor women live at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners: drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

“I say, Derville,” said Godeschal to his traveling companion, “look at that old fellow. Isn’t he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy.”

Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

“That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?”

“Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious,” said Godeschal.

“That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger’s glare she shot at him at that moment.”

This opening having excited Godeschal’s curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

“Good-morning, Colonel Chabert,” said Derville.

“Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe,” replied the veteran. “I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7,” he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--“Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?” he asked after a moment’s silence. “He is not married! He is very lucky!”

“Poor fellow!” said Godeschal. “Would you like something to buy snuff?”

With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

“Brave troopers!”

He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

“Fire! both arms! Vive Napoleon!” And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

“The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish,” said Derville.

“Childish! he?” said another old pauper, who was looking on. “Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, ‘Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.’--‘I was too young to be there,’ said Hyacinthe. ‘But I was at Jena.’ And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions.”

“What a destiny!” exclaimed Derville. “Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow,” Derville went on after a pause, “there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

“How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris.”

“I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches’ office,” replied Godeschal.


PARIS, February-March 1832.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Bonaparte, Napoleon
       The Vendetta
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Domestic Peace
       The Seamy Side of History
       A Woman of Thirty

     Crottat, Alexandre
       Cesar Birotteau
       A Start in Life
       A Woman of Thirty
       Cousin Pons

     Derville
       Gobseck
       A Start in Life
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Father Goriot
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Desroches (son)
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       A Start in Life
       A Woman of Thirty
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Government Clerks
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Man of Business
       The Middle Classes

     Ferraud, Comtesse
       The Government Clerks

     Godeschal, Francois-Claude-Marie
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       A Start in Life
       The Commission in Lunacy
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Pons

     Grandlieu, Vicomtesse de
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Gobseck

     Louis XVIII., Louis-Stanislas-Xavier
       The Chouans
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Ball at Sceaux
       The Lily of the Valley
       The Government Clerks

     Murat, Joachim, Prince
       The Vendetta
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Domestic Peace
       The Country Doctor

     Navarreins, Duc de
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       The Muse of the Department
       The Thirteen
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       The Peasantry
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Country Parson
       The Magic Skin
       The Gondreville Mystery
       The Secrets of a Princess
       Cousin Betty

     Vergniaud, Louis
       The Vendetta
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################