Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

AT THE SIGN OF THE CAT AND RACKET

By Honore De Balzac

Translated by Clara Bell

                              DEDICATION

                  To Mademoiselle Marie de Montheau

AT THE SIGN OF THE CAT AND RACKET

Half-way down the Rue Saint-Denis, near the corner of the Rue du Petit-Lion, stood one of those delightful houses that let historians reconstruct old Paris by analogy. The threatening walls of this tumbledown abode seemed decorated with hieroglyphics—the Xs and Vs the horizontal or diagonal timbers traced on the front, outlined by little parallel cracks in the plaster. Every beam appeared to quiver in its mortices at the passing of the lightest vehicle. This venerable structure was crowned by a triangular roof of which no example will, ere long, be seen in Paris. Warped by the extremes of the Paris climate, the covering projected three feet over the roadway, as much to protect the threshold from rainfall as to shelter the wall of a loft and its sill-less dormer-window. The upper story was built of planks overlapping each other like slates, doubtless not to overweight the frail house.

One rainy morning in March, a young man, carefully wrapped in his cloak, stood under the awning of a shop opposite this old house, studying it with the enthusiasm of an antiquary. In fact, this relic of sixteenth-century civic life offered more than one problem to an observer. Each story presented some singularity; on the first floor four tall, narrow windows, close together, were filled as to the lower panes with boards, producing the doubtful light by which a clever salesman can ascribe to his goods the color his customers desire. The young man seemed very scornful of this part of the house; his eyes had not yet rested on it. The windows of the second floor, where the Venetian blinds were drawn up, revealing dingy muslin curtains behind large Bohemian panes, did not interest him either. His attention was attracted to the third floor, to modest sash-frames of wood, so clumsily wrought they might belong in the Museum of Arts and Crafts to illustrate early French carpentry. These windows were glazed with small squares of glass so green that, but for his good eyes, the young man could not have seen the blue-checked cotton curtains that screened the room’s mysteries from profane eyes. Now and then, weary of his fruitless contemplation or of the silence that enwrapped the house like the whole neighborhood, he dropped his eyes toward the lower regions. An involuntary smile parted his lips each time he looked at the shop, where, in fact, were some laughable details.

A formidable wooden beam, resting on four pillars that seemed bent under the weight of the decrepit house, had been encrusted with as many coats of different paint as there are rouge layers on an old duchess’ cheek. In the middle of this broad and fantastically carved joist was an old painting representing a cat playing rackets. This picture moved the young man to mirth. No modern painter could invent so comical a caricature. The animal held in one forepaw a racket as big as itself, standing on its hind legs to aim at an enormous ball returned by a man in a fine embroidered coat. Drawing, color, and accessories suggested the artist had meant to make game of the shop-owner and passer-by. Time, while impairing this artless painting, had made it yet more grotesque by introducing uncertain features that must have puzzled a conscientious idler. For instance, the cat’s tail had been eaten into so that it might now be taken for the figure of a spectator—so long, thick, and furry were the tails of our forefathers’ cats. To the right of the picture, on an azure field that ill-disguised the decay of the wood, could be read the name “Guillaume,” and to the left, “Successor to Master Chevrel.” Sun and rain had worn away most of the gilding parsimoniously applied to the letters of this superscription, in which Us and Vs had changed places in obedience to old-world orthography.

To quench the pride of those who believe the world grows continually cleverer and that modern humbug surpasses everything, note that these signs, which seem whimsical to many Paris merchants, are the dead pictures of once living pictures by which our roguish ancestors tempted customers. Thus the Spinning Sow, the Green Monkey, and others were animals in cages whose skills astonished the passer-by, proving the patience of the fifteenth-century artisan. Such curiosities enriched their fortunate owners more than the signs of “Providence,” “Good-faith,” “Grace of God,” and “Decapitation of John the Baptist,” still seen in the Rue Saint-Denis.

However, our stranger was certainly not standing there to admire the cat, which a minute’s attention sufficed to stamp on his memory. The young man himself had his peculiarities. His cloak, folded like an antique drapery, showed a smart pair of shoes, all the more remarkable in the Paris mud because he wore white silk stockings, on which splashes betrayed his impatience. He had just come, no doubt, from a wedding or a ball; for at this early hour he held a pair of white gloves, and his black hair, now out of curl and flowing over his shoulders, showed it had been dressed a la Caracalla, a fashion introduced as much by David’s school of painting as by the mania for Greek and Roman styles that characterized the early years of the century.

In spite of the noise made by a few market gardeners, who, late, rattled past toward the great market-place at a gallop, the busy street lay in a stillness known only to those who have wandered through deserted Paris at hours when its roar, hushed, rises and spreads in the distance like the great voice of the sea. This strange young man must have seemed as curious to the shopkeeping folk of the “Cat and Racket” as the sign was to him. A dazzlingly white cravat rendered his anxious face paler than it was. The fire that flashed in his black eyes, gloomy and sparkling by turns, matched the singular outline of his features, with a wide, flexible mouth hardened into a smile. His forehead, knit with violent annoyance, had a stamp of doom. Is not the forehead the most prophetic feature of a man? When the stranger’s brow expressed passion the furrows formed were terrible in strength and energy; but when he recovered his calm, so easily upset, it beamed with a luminous grace that gave great attractiveness to a countenance in which joy, grief, love, anger, or scorn blazed so contagiously that the coldest man could not fail to be impressed.

He was so thoroughly vexed when the dormer-window of the loft was suddenly flung open that he did not observe the apparition of three laughing faces, pink, white, and chubby, as vulgar as the face of Commerce as seen in sculpture on certain monuments. These three faces, framed by the window, recalled the puffy cherubs floating among clouds around God the Father. The apprentices snuffed up the street’s exhalations with eagerness that showed how hot and poisonous their garret’s atmosphere must be. After pointing to the singular sentinel, the most jovial of the apprentices retired and came back holding an instrument whose hard metal pipe is now superseded by a leather tube; they all grinned with mischief as they looked down on the loiterer and sprinkled him with a fine white shower whose scent proved that three chins had just been shaved. Standing on tiptoe in the farthest corner of their loft to enjoy their victim’s rage, the lads ceased laughing on seeing the haughty indifference with which the young man shook his cloak and the intense contempt on his face as he glanced up at the empty window-frame.

At this moment a slender white hand threw up the lower half of one of the clumsy windows on the third floor by the aid of sash runners, whose pulleys often suddenly give way and release the heavy panes they should hold up. The watcher was rewarded for his long wait. The face of a young girl appeared, as fresh as one of the white cups that bloom on water, crowned by a frill of tumbled muslin that gave her head an air of exquisite innocence. Though wrapped in brown stuff, her neck and shoulders gleamed here and there through little openings left by her movements in sleep. No embarrassment marred the candor of her face or the calm look of eyes immortalized long since in the sublime works of Raphael; here were the same grace and repose as in those Virgins now proverbial. There was a delightful contrast between cheeks on which sleep had, as it were, given high relief to a superabundance of life, and the antiquity of the heavy window with its clumsy shape and black sill. Like day-blowing flowers that have not yet unfurled their cups, twisted by the night’s chills, the girl, hardly awake, let her blue eyes wander beyond the neighboring roofs to the sky; then, by habit, she cast them down on the gloomy depths of the street, where they immediately met those of her adorer. Vanity, no doubt, distressed her at being seen undressed; she started back, the worn pulley gave way, and the sash fell with a rapid run which in our day has earned for this artless invention of our forefathers the odious name Fenetre a la Guillotine. The vision had disappeared. To the young man the most radiant morning star seemed hidden by a cloud.

During these incidents the heavy inside shutters that protected the slight shop windows of the “Cat and Racket” had been removed as if by magic. The old door with its knocker was opened back against the entry wall by a man-servant, apparently coeval with the sign, who, with a shaking hand, hung upon it a square of cloth embroidered in yellow silk with the words: “Guillaume, successor to Chevrel.” Many a passer-by would have found it difficult to guess Monsieur Guillaume’s trade. Between the strong iron bars that protected his shop windows, certain packages wrapped in brown linen were hardly visible, though as numerous as herrings in a shoal. Notwithstanding the primitive aspect of the Gothic front, Monsieur Guillaume, of all the clothiers in Paris, was the one whose stores were always best provided, whose connections were the most extensive, and whose commercial honesty never lay under the slightest suspicion. If some brethren in business made a contract with the Government and lacked the required quantity of cloth, he was always ready to deliver it, however large the number of pieces tendered. The wily dealer knew a thousand ways of extracting the largest profits without being obliged, like them, to court patrons, cringe to them, or make costly presents. When his fellow-tradesmen could only pay in good bills of long date, he would mention his notary as accommodating, and managed to get a second profit out of the bargain—an arrangement that made a proverb among the traders of the Rue Saint-Denis: “Heaven preserve you from Monsieur Guillaume’s notary!” to signify a heavy discount.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The old merchant appeared on his shop threshold the instant the servant withdrew, as if by instinct. Monsieur Guillaume surveyed the Rue Saint-Denis, the neighboring shops, and the weather like a man returning to France after a long voyage. Having satisfied himself that nothing had changed, he noticed the stranger on guard; the young man, for his part, stared at the patriarchal draper as Humboldt might have studied an electric eel. Monsieur Guillaume wore loose black velvet breeches, pepper-and-salt stockings, and square-toed shoes with silver buckles. His coat, with square-cut fronts, tails, and collar, clothed his slightly bent figure in greenish cloth, finished with white metal buttons, tawny from wear. His gray hair was precisely combed and flattened over his yellow pate like a furrowed field. His little green eyes, as if pierced with a gimlet, flashed beneath arches faintly tinged with red where eyebrows should be. Anxieties had furrowed his forehead with as many horizontal lines as the creases in his coat. This colorless face expressed patience, commercial shrewdness, and the wily cupidity necessary in business. Then, as with other established families of the time, his habits and costume survived amid recent civilization like cherished traditions or antediluvian remains in a quarry.

The head of the Guillaume family upheld ancient practices; he might be heard to regret the Provost of Merchants and always called Tribunal of Commerce decisions the Sentence of the Consuls. Up and dressed first in the household, he stood sternly awaiting his three assistants, ready to scold them if late. These apprentices feared nothing more than his wordless scrutiny on Monday for traces of mischief. But at that moment Guillaume paid no heed to them; he was absorbed in trying to divine why the young man in silk stockings and a cloak kept casting anxious looks at his signboard and into the depths of his shop. Bright daylight let the stranger discern the cashier’s corner, railed and screened by old green silk curtains, where immense ledgers, the silent oracles of the house, were kept. The inquisitive gazer seemed to covet this nook, sketching a side dining-room lit by a skylight from which the family at meals could observe the smallest incident at the shop-door. So much affection for his dwelling seemed suspicious to a trader mindful of the law of maximum prices; Monsieur Guillaume naturally suspected the stranger had an eye on the till of the Cat and Racket. After observing the mute duel between master and stranger, the eldest apprentice, noticing the young man watching the third-floor windows, stepped onto the stone flag beside Guillaume. He went into the street, raised his head, and fancied he saw Mademoiselle Augustine retreating hastily. Annoyed, Guillaume glanced at him; both he and his amorous apprentice were suddenly relieved of the fears the young man's presence had excited. The stranger hailed a hackney and jumped in with an air of affected indifference. His departure relieved the other two lads, uneasy about their practical joke's victim.

“Well, gentlemen, what ails you that you stand there with your arms folded?” said Monsieur Guillaume to his three neophytes. “In former days, bless you, when I was in Master Chevrel’s service, I should have overhauled more than two pieces of cloth by this time.”

“Then it was daylight earlier,” said the second assistant, whose duty this was.

The old shopkeeper could not help smiling. Though two of these young fellows were entrusted by fathers who were rich manufacturers at Louviers and Sedan, and would have a hundred thousand francs when they came of age, Guillaume regarded it his duty to keep them under the rod of an old-world despotism, unknown nowadays in flashy modern shops where apprentices expect to be rich at thirty. He made them work hard. These three could do the work of ten clerks whose sybaritic tastes now swell the budget. Not a sound disturbed this solemn house; hinges were oiled, and even the meanest furniture showed the cleanliness of strict order and economy. The most waggish of the trio amused himself by writing the date of its first appearance on the Gruyere cheese left for breakfast, which they then left untouched. Such mischief sometimes brought a smile to the younger daughter, the pretty maiden who had just appeared to the bewitched man in the street.

Though each apprentice paid a round sum for board, none would have dared remain at the master's table at dessert; when Madame Guillaume spoke of dressing the salad, they trembled at her thrift with oil. They never spent a night away without beforehand giving a plausible reason. Every Sunday, in turn, two of them accompanied the Guillaume family to Mass and vespers at Saint-Leu. Mesdemoiselles Virginie and Augustine, simply attired in cotton print, each took an apprentice's arm and walked ahead under their mother's piercing eye, who closed the little procession with her husband, carrying two large black-morocco prayer-books. The second apprentice received no salary; the eldest, after twelve years' perseverance and discretion, was paid eight hundred francs a year. On certain family festivals he received small gifts whose value Madame Guillaume alone enhanced—netted purses she stuffed with cotton wool to show the fancy stitches, braces of the strongest make, or heavy silk stockings. Sometimes, rarely, this prime minister was admitted to share the family's pleasures—going into the country or, after months, taking a theatre box to command a piece Paris had almost forgotten.

The barrier of respect that once divided a master draper from his apprentices made them more likely to steal a piece of cloth than breach etiquette; such reserve may now seem ridiculous, but these old houses were a school of honesty and sound morals. Masters adopted their apprentices: a young man’s linen was mended by the mistress of the house; if an apprentice fell ill he received maternal attention. In danger the master lavished money on the best physicians, accountable not only to parents for conduct and training. If an honest apprentice suffered misfortune, tradesmen valued his intelligence and did not hesitate to entrust their daughters' happiness to men they had long trusted with their fortunes. Guillaume was of this old school; if he had its ridiculous side, he had all its good qualities. Joseph Lebas, the chief assistant, an orphan without fortune, was in his mind destined to marry Virginie, his elder daughter. But Joseph did not share his master's symmetrical ideas—he would not, for an empire, have the second daughter married before the elder. The unhappy assistant felt his heart wholly given to Mademoiselle Augustine, the younger. To explain this secret passion, one must look into the springs of the absolute government that ruled the cloth-merchant’s household.

Guillaume had two daughters. The elder, Mademoiselle Virginie, was the very image of her mother. Madame Guillaume, daughter of the Sieur Chevrel, sat so upright behind her desk that more than once some wag hinted she was a stuffed figure. Her long, thin face betrayed exaggerated piety. Lacking attractions or amiability, Madame Guillaume, nearly sixty, wore an unvarying cap with long lappets like a widow's. In the neighborhood she was known as the “portress nun.” Her speech was curt, and her movements had the stiff precision of a semaphore. Her eye, with a gleam like a cat’s, seemed to spite the world because she was so ugly. Mademoiselle Virginie, raised under her mother's rule, had reached twenty-eight. Youth softened the graceless likeness, but maternal austerity had endowed her with two great qualities: patience and gentleness. Mademoiselle Augustine, eighteen, resembled neither parent. She was delicately made, full of gracious candor; a man of the world might have found only a petty coarseness of gesture or a want of ease. Her placid face was often full of the transient melancholy that comes over girls too weak to dare resist their mother's will.

Always plainly dressed, the sisters gratified feminine vanity only by a luxury of cleanliness that suited them wonderfully and blended with the polished counters and shining shelves, on which the old man-servant never left a speck of dust, and with the old-world simplicity of all they saw. Their style of living compelled them to find happiness in persistent work; Augustine and Virginie had hitherto satisfied their mother, who secretly prided herself on their perfect characters. Trained for a commercial life, hearing only dreary trade arguments, taught grammar, bookkeeping, a little Bible-history, and the history of France in Le Ragois, and reading only what their mother sanctioned, their ideas had little scope. They knew housecraft, prices, the difficulty of amassing money; they were economical and respected the qualities that make a man of business. Though their father was rich, they were as skilled in darning as in embroidery; their mother often spoke of teaching them to cook so they might know how to order a dinner and scold a cook with authority. They knew little of the world's pleasures; seeing how their parents lived, they rarely let their eyes wander beyond the walls of their hereditary home, which to their mother was the whole universe. Family anniversaries furnished the future of earthly joy to them.

When the great drawing-room on the second floor was prepared to receive company—Madame Roguin, Demoiselle Chevrel (fifteen months younger and bedecked with diamonds); young Rabourdin of the Finance Office; Monsieur Cesar Birotteau, the rich perfumer, and his wife; Monsieur Camusot, the richest silk mercer in the Rue des Bourdonnais, with his father-in-law Monsieur Cardot, two or three old bankers, and some immaculate ladies—the arrangements required by packing away the plate, the Dresden china, the candlesticks, and the glass varied the monotonous lives of the three women, who labored like nuns to receive their bishop. That evening, tired from wiping, rubbing, unpacking, and arranging the festival gauds, as the girls helped their mother undress, Madame Guillaume would say, “Children, we have done nothing today.”

On very great occasions when the “portress nun” allowed dancing, restricting boston, whist, and backgammon to her bedroom, such a concession was the greatest felicity and made them happier than the two or three grand balls Guillaume took them to at Carnival. Once a year the worthy draper gave an entertainment and spared no expense. However rich or fashionable the guests, they were careful not to be absent; the most important houses on the exchange relied on Monsieur Guillaume's immense credit, fortune, or experience. Still, the merchant’s daughters did not profit much from the world’s lessons. At these parties, which the ledger recorded as credits of the house, they wore dresses so shabby they blushed. Their dancing was unremarkable, and their mother's surveillance did not permit conversation with partners beyond Yes and No. The Cat and Racket's law required them to be home by eleven, the hour when balls begin to be lively. Thus their pleasures, which seemed to match their father's position, were often made insipid by circumstances rooted in family habits and principles.

As to their usual life: Madame Guillaume required her daughters to be dressed very early, to come down each day at the same hour, and she ordered their employments with monastic regularity. Augustine, however, had a spirit lofty enough to feel the emptiness of such a life. Her blue eyes would sometimes be raised as if to pierce the depths of that gloomy staircase and those damp store-rooms. After sounding the profound cloistral silence, she seemed to listen to remote, inarticulate revelations of a life of passion that values feelings above things. At such moments her cheek would flush, her idle hands would lay the muslin sewing on the polished oak counter, and her mother, in a sour voice, would ask, “Augustine, my treasure, what are you thinking about?” It is possible that two romances Augustine had discovered in the cupboard of a cook Madame Guillaume had lately discharged—Hippolyte Comte de Douglas and Le Comte de Comminges—contributed to the development of the young girl's ideas, which she devoured in secret during long winter nights.

Augustine’s expression of vague longing, her gentle voice, her jasmine skin, and her blue eyes had kindled in poor Lebas’s soul a flame as ardent as it was reverent. From an easily understood caprice, Augustine felt no affection for the orphan; perhaps she did not know he loved her. On the other hand, the senior apprentice—long-legged, chestnut-haired, with big hands and a powerful frame—had a secret admirer in Mademoiselle Virginie, who, despite her dower of fifty thousand crowns, had as yet no suitor. Nothing could be more natural than these two passions at cross-purposes, born in the silence of the dingy shop, as violets bloom in the depths of a wood. The mute and constant looks that made the young people’s eyes meet by sheer need of change amid persistent work and cloistered peace would sooner or later give rise to love. The habit of always seeing the same face leads insensibly to reading there the qualities of the soul and at last effaces all its defects.

“At the pace at which that man goes, our girls will soon have to go on their knees to a suitor!” said Monsieur Guillaume to himself, as he read the first decree by which Napoleon drew in advance on the conscript classes.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
From that day the old merchant, grieved at seeing his eldest daughter fade, remembered how he had married Mademoiselle Chevrel under much the same circumstances as Joseph Lebas and Virginie. It had been good business: to marry off his daughter and discharge a sacred debt by repaying to an orphan the benefit he had once received from his predecessor. Joseph Lebas, now thirty-three, understood the obstacle a difference of fifteen years placed between Augustine and himself. Clear-sighted enough to read Monsieur Guillaume’s purpose, he was sure the younger would never be allowed to marry before the elder. The hapless assistant, warm of heart and vigorous of body, therefore suffered in silence.

This was the state of affairs in the tiny republic of the Rue Saint-Denis, not unlike a dependency of La Trappe. To give a full account of feelings and events, however, it is necessary to go back some months before the scene with which this story opens. At dusk a young man passing the darkened shop of the Cat and Racket paused to gaze at a picture any painter might have coveted. The shop, not yet lighted, was a dark cave; beyond it the dining-room was visible. A hanging lamp shed yellow light that lent the scene the charm of a Dutch interior. White linen, silver, and cut glass flashed like brilliant accessories against strong contrasts of light and shade. The figures—the head of the family and his wife, the apprentices’ faces, the pure form of Augustine beside a fat, chubby-cheeked maid—formed a strange, candid group. Peace, silence, and the modest way of life in this family read plainly in their faces; to an artist used to rendering nature, any attempt to depict this chance scene would seem almost hopeless.

The stranger was a young painter who seven years earlier had won the first prize for painting. Just returned from Rome, his soul sated with poetry and his eyes with Raphael and Michelangelo, he now thirsted for real nature after dwelling in a land where art everywhere bears something grandiose. His heart, long prey to Italian passion, craved one of those modest, meditative maidens whom in Rome he had seen only in painting. Enthralled by the living picture before him, he admired Augustine; she seemed pensive and did not eat; the lamp’s light fell full on her face, and her bust seemed to move in a circle of fire that outlined her head and illuminated it with almost supernatural effect. The artist involuntarily compared her to an exiled angel dreaming of heaven. A strange, limpid love flooded his heart. After a minute, overwhelmed, he tore himself away, went home, ate nothing, and could not sleep.

The next day he shut himself in his studio until he had fixed on canvas the magic of the scene that memory had made sacred; his happiness was incomplete until he possessed a faithful portrait of his idol. He passed the Cat and Racket many times and even ventured in once or twice in disguise to get a closer view of the bewitching creature under Madame Guillaume’s wing. For eight months, devoted to love and brush, he forgot friends, the theatre, poetry, music, and his old habits. One morning Girodet broke through the barriers artists use, entered his room, and asked, “What are you going to send to the Salon?” The painter showed him a small easel picture and a portrait. After a long, eager study, Girodet threw himself upon his comrade’s neck and hugged him without speaking; his feelings could only be expressed soul to soul.

“You are in love?” said Girodet.

They both knew that the finest portraits by Titian, Raphael, and Leonardo sprang from such devotion. The artist bowed his head in reply.

“How happy you are to be in love here, after coming back from Italy! But I do not advise you to send such works to the Salon,” Girodet went on. “These pictures will not be appreciated. Such true coloring, such labor, cannot yet be understood; the public is not used to such depths. The pictures we paint, my dear fellow, are mere screens. We should do better to turn rhymes and translate the antique poets! There is more glory there than from our luckless canvases!”

Despite this advice, both pictures were exhibited. The Interior revolutionized painting and gave birth to the genre pictures that now crowd exhibitions. The portrait, too, remained unforgettable; the public, sometimes discerning, awarded it the crown even Girodet would have hung over it. Crowds gathered; speculators and moneyed men would have paid dearly, but the artist refused to sell or make replicas. A large sum was offered for the right to engrave them; print-sellers were no more favored than amateurs.

Though these events occupied the world, they did not penetrate the monastic solitude of the Rue Saint-Denis until Madame Roguin, the notary’s wife, visited Madame Guillaume and spoke of the exhibition before Augustine, whom she liked. Her gossip inspired Augustine with a wish to see the pictures and courage enough to ask her cousin secretly to take her to the Louvre. Her cousin negotiated with Madame Guillaume to release Augustine for two hours from her dull labors. Thus Augustine made her way through the crowd to see the famed work. A fit of trembling shook her like an aspen as she recognized herself. Terrified, she looked about to find Madame Roguin, from whom she had been separated by the press of people. At that moment her frightened eyes fell on the impassioned face of the young painter. She at once recalled the figure of a loiterer she had often observed, thinking him a new neighbor.

“You see how love has inspired me,” said the artist in the timid creature’s ear, and she stood dismayed.

She found courage to push through the crowd and join her cousin, still struggling with the mass. “You will be stifled!” cried Augustine. “Let us go.” But at the Salon two women cannot always direct their steps. By the current of the crowd, Mademoiselle Guillaume and her cousin were pushed within a few steps of the second picture. Chance placed them where the famous canvas could be easily seen. Madame Roguin’s exclamation was lost in the hubbub; Augustine involuntarily wept at the sight of the wonderful study. Then, by a nearly inexplicable impulse, she laid her finger on her lips as she perceived near her the ecstatic face of the young painter. He nodded and pointed to Madame Roguin as a spoil-sport, showing Augustine he had understood. This pantomime struck the young girl like hot coals; she felt guilt as if bound in a compact with the artist. The suffocating heat, dazzling dresses, truth of coloring, the multitude of living or painted figures, and profusion of gilt frames intoxicated and doubled her alarm. She might have fainted if a sudden rapture had not surged up to vivify her: she believed herself under the power of the Devil, as preachers warned. It was a moment of madness. She found herself accompanied to her cousin’s carriage by the young man, radiant. Augustine, prey to new agitation and intoxication that seemed to abandon her to nature, listened to the eloquent voice of her heart and kept looking at the painter, betraying the emotion that possessed her. Never had the rose of her cheeks shown in stronger contrast with the whiteness of her skin. The artist saw her beauty and modesty in full bloom. She felt rapture mingled with terror, thinking her presence had brought happiness to the man whose name was on every lip and whose talent lent immortality to transient scenes. She was loved! It seemed impossible to doubt. After he vanished, his simple words “You see how love has inspired me!” still echoed in her ear. Her throbbing heart ached; her heated blood revealed unknown forces in her being. She feigned a severe headache to avoid answering her cousin’s questions about the pictures; on their return Madame Roguin told Madame Guillaume of the fame that had fallen on the house of the Cat and Racket, and Augustine quaked as her mother said she should go to the Salon to see her house there. The young girl again declared herself unwell and was allowed to go to bed.

“That is what comes of sight-seeing,” exclaimed Monsieur Guillaume. “A headache. And is it so very amusing to see in a picture what you can see any day in your own street? Don’t talk to me of your artists! Like writers, they are a starveling crew. Why the devil must they choose my house to flaunt in their pictures?”

“It may help to sell a few ells more of cloth,” said Joseph Lebas.

Such remarks did nothing to shield art from the judgment-seat of trade. These speeches gave Augustine little hope; that night she gave herself to the first meditations of love. The day’s events seemed a dream and a joy to recall. She was initiated into the fears, hopes, and remorse—the ebb and flow of feeling that toss the heart of one so simple and timid. She perceived the void in the gloomy house and the treasure in her soul: to be the wife of a genius, to share his glory. What ravages must such a vision make in the heart of a girl brought up in such a family, and what hopes must it raise in one who, amid sordid elements, had pined for elegance! A sunbeam had fallen into the prison. Augustine was suddenly in love. So many of her feelings were soothed that she succumbed without reflection. At eighteen, love throws a prism between a girl’s eyes and the world. She could not suspect the hard facts that result from the union of a loving woman with a man of imagination, and she believed herself called to make him happy, seeing no disparity between them. To her the future would be as the present. Next day, when her parents returned from the Salon, their dejected faces showed disappointment: the painter had removed the two pictures, and Madame Guillaume had lost her cashmere shawl. Yet the news that the pictures had disappeared since her visit revealed to Augustine a delicacy of sentiment which a woman can always appreciate, even by instinct.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
On the morning when, returning from a ball, Theodore de Sommervieux—the name fame had engraved on Augustine’s heart—was splashed by apprentices while waiting for his artless little friend (who did not know he was there), the lovers met for the fourth time since the Salon. The house rules added violence to the painter’s passion for Augustine.

How could he approach a young girl seated in a counting-house between Mademoiselle Virginie and Madame Guillaume? How correspond with her when her mother never left her side? Ingenious as lovers are in imagining woes, Theodore fancied a rival among the assistants and supposed the others devoted to that man. If he evaded these sons of Argus, he would still be detected under the old draper’s stern eye or Madame Guillaume’s. The vehemence of his passion kept him from the expedients which, driven by craving for liberty or by love, prompt prisoners and lovers to contrive last resources. Theodore paced the neighborhood with a madman’s restlessness, as though movement might inspire invention. After racking his brain, he bribed the blowsy waiting-maid with gold. Thus a few notes were exchanged at long intervals during the fortnight after the ill-starred morning when Monsieur Guillaume and Theodore had so scrutinized one another. The young couple agreed to meet during Mass and vespers on Sunday at Saint-Leu. Augustine sent Theodore a list of family relations and friends, whom the painter tried to reach, hoping to interest some soul absorbed in money and trade—people to whom genuine passion must seem a monstrous speculation. Meanwhile, nothing changed at the sign of the Cat and Racket. If Augustine was absent-minded, stole up to her room to make signals by a jar of flowers, sighed, or was lost in thought, no one noticed, not even her mother. This may surprise those familiar with the household spirit, where any poetic idea would startle; yet the quiet barque navigating the stormy waters of the Paris Exchange, under the Cat and Racket, was in the toils of one of those periodic tempests. For the last fortnight the five men forming the crew, with Madame Guillaume and Mademoiselle Virginie, had been engaged in stock-taking.

Every bale was turned and measured to ascertain the exact remnant. Tickets attached to each parcel were examined to see when the piece had been bought. Retail prices were fixed. Monsieur Guillaume, always on his feet, pen behind his ear, was like a captain commanding the ship’s workings. His sharp tones, spoken through a trap-door to inquire into the cellar-store, issued the barbarous formulas of trade-jargon, expressed only in cipher. “How much H. N. Z.?”—“All sold.”—“What is left of Q. X.?”—“Two ells.”—“At what price?”—“Fifty-five three.”—“Set down A. at three, with all of J. J., all of M. P., and what is left of V. D. O.” A hundred other injunctions equally unintelligible were spouted over the counters like modern poetry quoted to excite enthusiasm for a poet. In the evening Guillaume, shut up with his assistant and wife, balanced accounts, carried the balance, wrote to debtors, and made out bills. All three were busy over this enormous labor, whose result could be stated on foolscap: so much to the good in cash, so much in goods, so much in bills and notes; that he did not owe a sou; that a hundred or two hundred thousand francs were owing to him; that capital had been increased; that farmlands, houses, or investments were extended or repaired. Hence it became necessary to begin again with increased ardor to accumulate crown-pieces, without these laborious ants ever asking—“To what end?”

Favored by this annual turmoil, Augustine escaped her Argus-eyed relations’ investigations. At last, one Saturday evening, stock-taking was finished. The figures showed a row of zeros long enough to let Guillaume once relax the stern rule about dessert. The shrewd old draper rubbed his hands and allowed his assistants to remain at table. They had hardly swallowed a thimbleful of some home-made liqueur when the rumble of a carriage was heard. The family party were going to see Cendrillon at the Variétés, while the two younger apprentices each received a crown of six francs, with permission to go wherever they pleased, provided they were in by midnight.

Notwithstanding this debauch, the old cloth-merchant was shaving at six the next morning, put on his maroon coat, fastened gold buckles on his wide satin breeches; and about seven, while all were still sleeping, he went to the little office adjoining the shop. Daylight came through a window fortified by iron bars, looking out on a small yard surrounded by black walls like a well. The old merchant opened the iron-lined shutters and threw up the lower sash. The icy air cooled the hot little room full of the peculiar office odor.

He stood hand on the greasy arm of a large morocco-lined cane chair, hesitated to sit, and looked with affection at the double desk where his wife’s seat opposite his own fit into a niche. He contemplated numbered boxes, files, implements, the cash-box—objects of immemorial origin—and fancied himself with the shade of Master Chevrel. He even pulled out the high stool on which he had once sat before his departed master. This stool, covered with black leather and revealing horse-hair at the corners, he placed shaking on the spot where his predecessor had put it, and then, with feeling, pulled a bell that rang at Joseph Lebas’ bed. After that decisive blow, the old man, perhaps overcome, took up bills of exchange and looked at them without seeing them.

Suddenly Joseph Lebas stood before him.

“Sit down there,” said Guillaume, pointing to the stool.

As the old master had never yet bid his assistant sit in his presence, Joseph was startled.

“What do you think of these notes?” asked Guillaume.

“They will never be paid.”

“Why?”

“Well, I heard the day before yesterday Etienne and Co. had made their payments in gold.”

“Oh, oh!” said the draper. “One must be very ill to show one’s bile. Let us speak of something else.—Joseph, stock-taking is done.”

“Yes, monsieur, and the dividend is one of the best you have ever made.”

“Do not use new-fangled words. Say the profits, Joseph. Do you know, my boy, this result is partly owing to you? And I do not intend to pay you a salary any longer. Madame Guillaume has suggested taking you into partnership.—‘Guillaume and Lebas’; will that not make a good name? We might add, ‘and Co.’ to round off the firm’s signature.”

Tears rose to Joseph’s eyes, which he tried to hide.

“Oh, Monsieur Guillaume, how have I deserved such kindness? I only do my duty. It was so much already that you should take interest in a poor orph—”

He brushed his cuff and dared not look at the old man, who smiled, thinking the modest young fellow needed encouragement.

“To be sure,” said Virginie’s father, “you do not altogether deserve this favor, Joseph. You have not so much confidence in me as I have in you.” Joseph looked up quickly. “You know all the cash-box secrets. For two years I have told you almost all my concerns. I have sent you to travel in our goods. In short, I have nothing on my conscience as regards you. But you—you have a soft place, and you have never breathed a word.” Joseph blushed. “Ah-ha! So you thought you could deceive an old fox like me? When you knew I had scented the Lecocq bankruptcy?”

“What, monsieur?” replied Joseph, looking keenly at his master, “you knew I was in love?”

“I know everything, you rascal,” said the worthy old merchant, pulling the assistant’s ear. “And I forgive you—I did the same myself.”

“And you will give her to me?”

“Yes—with fifty thousand crowns; I will leave you as much by will, and we will start our new career under a new firm name. We will do good business yet, my boy!” added the old man, standing and flourishing his arms. “I tell you, son-in-law, there is nothing like trade. Those who ask what pleasure is to be found in it are simpletons. To be on the scent of a good bargain, to hold your own on Change, to watch anxiously whether Etienne and Co. will fail, to see a regiment of Guards march past all dressed in your cloth, to trip your neighbor up—honestly, of course!—to make goods cheaper than others; then to carry out an undertaking you planned, which begins, grows, totters, and succeeds! to know every house of business’s workings as a minister of police, never to make a mistake; to hold up your head amid wrecks, to have friends by correspondence in every manufacturing town—is not that a perpetual game? That is life! I shall die in that harness like old Chevrel, but taking it easy now, all the same.”

In his rhetoric, Guillaume hardly looked at his assistant, who wept copiously. “Why, Joseph, my poor boy, what is the matter?”

“Oh, I love her so! Monsieur Guillaume, my heart fails me; I believe—”

“Well, well, boy,” said the old man, touched, “you are happier than you know, by God! For she loves you. I know it.”

He blinked his little green eyes at the young man.

“Mademoiselle Augustine! Mademoiselle Augustine!” exclaimed Joseph in rapture.

He was about to rush out when a hand of iron clutched him, and his astonished master spun him round once more.

“What has Augustine to do with this matter?” he asked, in a voice that froze Joseph.

“Is it not she that—that—I love?” stammered the assistant.

Much put out by his lack of perspicacity, Guillaume sat and rested his head in his hands to consider the perplexing position. Joseph, shamefaced and despairing, remained standing.

“Joseph,” the draper said with frigid dignity, “I was speaking of Virginie. Love cannot be made to order. I know, too, that you can be trusted. We will forget this. I will not let Augustine marry before Virginie.—Your interest will be ten per cent.”

The young man, to whom love gave a strange eloquence, clasped his hand and spoke for a quarter of an hour with such warmth that he altered the situation. If the question had been business, the old tradesman would have had fixed principles; but tossed a thousand miles from commerce on the ocean of sentiment, without a compass, he floated undecided. Carried away by fatherly kindness, he began to beat about the bush.

“Deuce take it, Joseph, you must know there are ten years between my two children. Mademoiselle Chevrel was no beauty, still she had nothing to complain of in me. Do as I did. Come, don’t cry. Can you be so silly? What is to be done? It can be managed perhaps. There is always some way out of a scrape. And we men are not always devoted Celadons to our wives—you understand? Madame Guillaume is very pious... Come. By Gad, boy, give your arm to Augustine this morning as we go to Mass.”

These phrases, spoken at random, concluded in a way that made the lover happy. He was already thinking of a friend as a match for Virginie as he left the smoky office, pressing his future father-in-law’s hand and saying with a knowing look that all would turn out for the best.

“What will Madame Guillaume say?” was the idea that troubled the worthy merchant when alone.

At breakfast Madame Guillaume and Virginie, to whom the draper had not yet confided his disappointment, cast meaning glances at Joseph, who was embarrassed. The young assistant’s bashfulness commended him to his prospective mother-in-law. The matron became so cheerful she smiled at her husband and allowed herself little pleasantries of time-honored acceptance in such simple families. She wondered whether Joseph or Virginie were taller, to ask them to compare height. This fooling brought a cloud to the master’s brow, and he made a point of decorum by desiring Augustine to take the assistant’s arm on their way to Saint-Leu. Madame Guillaume, surprised at this manly delicacy, honored her husband with a nod. So the procession left in such order as to suggest no suspicion to neighbors.

“Does it not seem to you, Mademoiselle Augustine,” said the assistant, trembling, “that the wife of a merchant whose credit is as good as Monsieur Guillaume’s, for instance, might enjoy herself more than Madame your mother does? Might wear diamonds—or keep a carriage? For my part, if I were to marry, I would take all the work and see my wife happy. I would not put her into the counting-house. In drapery a woman is not so necessary now. Monsieur Guillaume was right to act as he did—and his wife liked it. But so long as a woman knows bookkeeping, correspondence, retail business, orders, and housekeeping, so as not to sit idle, that is enough. At seven, when the shop is shut, I shall take my pleasures, go to the play, and into company.—But you are not listening to me.”

“Yes, indeed, Monsieur Joseph. What do you think of painting? That is a fine calling.”

“Yes. I know a master house-painter, Monsieur Lourdois. He is well-to-do.”

Thus conversing, the family reached Saint-Leu. There Madame Guillaume reasserted her rights, and, for the first time, placed Augustine next herself, Virginie on the fourth chair beside Lebas. During the sermon all went well between Augustine and Theodore, who, standing behind a pillar, worshiped his Madonna with fervent devotion; but at the elevation of the Host Madame Guillaume discovered, rather late, that her daughter was holding her prayer-book upside down. She was about to speak when, lowering her veil, she interrupted her devotions to look where her daughter’s eyes found attraction. With her spectacles she saw the young artist, whose fashionable elegance seemed to proclaim him a cavalry officer on leave rather than a neighborhood tradesman. It is difficult to imagine Madame Guillaume’s violent agitation—she who prided herself on having brought up her daughters to perfection—on discovering in Augustine a clandestine passion which her prudery and ignorance exaggerated in peril. She believed her daughter cankered to the core.

“Hold your book right way up, miss,” she muttered, low and tremulous with wrath. She snatched the tell-tale prayer-book and turned it right. “Do not allow your eyes to look anywhere but at your prayers,” she added, “or I shall have something to say to you. Your father and I will talk to you after church.”

These words struck poor Augustine. She felt faint; but, torn between distress and dread of causing a commotion, she concealed her anguish. It was easy to see her stormy soul from the trembling of her prayer-book and the tears dropping on each page. From the furious glare Madame Guillaume shot at him, the artist saw the peril of his love; he went out with a raging soul, determined to venture all.

“Go to your room, miss!” said Madame Guillaume on their return; “we will send for you, but take care not to quit it.”

The conference between husband and wife was so secret that at first nothing was heard. Virginie, who had tried to give her sister courage by gentle remonstrances, carried her good nature so far as to listen at her mother’s bedroom door to catch a word or two. The first time down she heard her father exclaim, “Then, madame, do you wish to kill your daughter?”

“My poor dear!” said Virginie in tears, “papa takes your part.”

“And what do they want to do to Theodore?” asked the innocent girl.

Virginie, inquisitive, went down again and stayed longer; she learned that Joseph Lebas loved Augustine. It was written that on this memorable day the usually peaceful house should be a hell. Monsieur Guillaume brought Joseph to despair by telling him of Augustine’s love for a stranger. Lebas, who had advised his friend to court Virginie, saw his hopes wrecked. Virginie, overcome by hearing Joseph had in a way refused her, had a sick headache. The dispute that arose between Monsieur and Madame Guillaume, for the third time in their lives of antagonism, showed itself in a terrible form. Finally, at half-past four, Augustine, pale, trembling, and red-eyed, was hauled before her parents. The poor child artlessly related her brief tale of love. Reassured by a speech from her father, who promised to listen in silence, she gathered courage and pronounced the name Theodore de Sommervieux, with a mischievous emphasis on the aristocratic “de.” Yielding to the unknown charm of talking of her feelings, she declared with innocent decision she loved Monsieur de Sommervieux, had written to him, and added with tears: “To sacrifice me to another man would make me wretched.”

“But, Augustine, you cannot surely know what a painter is?” cried her mother with horror.

“Madame Guillaume!” said the old man, compelling her silence.—“Augustine,” he went on, “artists are generally little better than beggars. They are too extravagant not to be always a bad sort. I served the late Monsieur Joseph Vernet, Monsieur Lekain, and Monsieur Noverre. Oh, if you could only know the tricks played on poor Father Chevrel by Noverre, by the Chevalier de Saint-Georges, and especially by Philidor! They are a set of rascals; I know them well! They all have a gab and nice manners. Ah, your Monsieur Sumer—, Somm—”

“De Sommervieux, papa.”

“Well, well, de Sommervieux. He can never have been half so sweet to you as Monsieur le Chevalier de Saint-Georges was to me the day I got a verdict of the consuls against him. And in those days they were gentlemen of quality.”

“But, father, Monsieur Theodore is of good family, and he wrote me he is rich; his father was called Chevalier de Sommervieux before the Revolution.”

At these words Monsieur Guillaume looked at his terrible better half, who, like an angry woman, sat tapping the floor with her foot while keeping sullen silence; she avoided casting wrathful looks at Augustine, appearing to leave to Monsieur Guillaume the whole responsibility in so grave a matter, since her opinion was not listened to. Nevertheless, seeing her husband give way so mildly under a catastrophe that had no concern with business, she exclaimed:

“Really, monsieur, you are so weak with your daughters! However—”

The sound of a carriage stopping at the door interrupted her. In a minute Madame Roguin stood in the middle of the room, looking at the actors in this domestic scene: “I know all, my dear cousin,” she said, patronizing.

Madame Roguin made the mistake of supposing a Paris notary’s wife could play the part of a fashion favorite.

“I know all,” she repeated, “and I have come into Noah’s Ark, like the dove, with the olive-branch. I read that allegory in the Genie du Christianisme,” she added to Madame Guillaume; “the allusion ought to please you, cousin. Do you know,” she smiled at Augustine, “that Monsieur de Sommervieux is charming? He gave me my portrait this morning, painted by a master’s hand. It is worth at least six thousand francs.” At these words she patted Monsieur Guillaume on the arm. The old draper could not help his peculiar grimace.

“I know Monsieur de Sommervieux very well,” the Dove ran on. “He has come to my evenings this fortnight and made them delightful. He has told me all his woes and commissioned me to plead for him. I know since this morning that he adores Augustine, and he shall have her. Ah, cousin, do not shake your head in refusal. He will be created Baron, I can tell you, and has just been made Chevalier of the Legion of Honor by the Emperor at the Salon. Roguin is now his lawyer, and knows his affairs. Well! Monsieur de Sommervieux has twelve thousand francs a year in good landed estate. Do you know that a father-in-law of such a man may rise in life—become mayor of his arrondissement, for instance. Have we not seen Monsieur Dupont become a Count of the Empire, and a senator, because he went as mayor to congratulate the Emperor on entering Vienna? Oh, this marriage must take place! For my part, I adore the dear young man. His behavior to Augustine is only met in romances. Be easy, little one; you shall be happy, and every girl will wish she were in your place. Madame la Duchesse de Carigliano, who comes to my At Homes, raves about Monsieur de Sommervieux. Some spiteful people say she only comes to me to meet him; as if a duchess of yesterday were doing too much honor to a Chevrel, whose family have been respected citizens these hundred years!

“Augustine,” Madame Roguin went on after a short pause, “I have seen the portrait. Heavens! How lovely it is! Do you know the Emperor wanted it? He laughed and said to the Deputy High Constable that if there were many women like that in his court while all the kings visited it, he should have no difficulty preserving the peace of Europe. Is not that a compliment?”

The day’s tempests were to end in clear weather. Madame Roguin’s address and volubility touched strings in Monsieur and Madame Guillaume’s dry hearts. At this strange period commerce and finance were possessed by a mania for alliance with rank; generals of the Empire took full advantage. Monsieur Guillaume, singularly, opposed this craving. His axioms favored marriage within class; that every one is punished sooner or later for climbing too high; that love cannot endure household worries unless partners had sound qualities and understood each other—if one spoke Greek and his wife Latin, they might die of hunger. He compared such marriages to mixed silk and wool. Still, vanity prevailed: the pilot who steered the Cat and Racket wisely gave way before Madame Roguin. Austere Madame Guillaume was the first to see in her daughter’s affection a reason to abdicate principles and consent to receive Monsieur de Sommervieux, whom she promised to subject to severe inquisition.

The old draper went to look for Joseph Lebas and inform him. At half-past six the dining-room immortalized by the artist saw, united under its skylight, Monsieur and Madame Roguin, the young painter and his charming Augustine, Joseph Lebas—who found happiness in patience—and Virginie, convalescent from her headache. Monsieur and Madame Guillaume saw in perspective both children married and the Cat and Racket’s fortunes in skilled hands. Their satisfaction was high when, at dessert, Theodore presented the wonderful picture they had failed to see, representing the old shop’s interior, to which they all owed so much happiness.

“Isn’t it pretty!” cried Guillaume. “And to think that any one would pay thirty thousand francs for that!”

“Because you can see my lappets in it,” said Madame Guillaume.

“And the cloth unrolled!” added Lebas; “you might take it up in your hand.”

“Drapery always comes out well,” replied the painter. “We modern artists would be happy if we could touch the perfection of antique drapery.”

“So you like drapery!” cried old Guillaume. “Well, then, by Gad! shake hands, my young friend. Since you can respect trade, we shall understand each other. And why should it be despised? The world began with trade, since Adam sold Paradise for an apple. He did not strike a good bargain though!” The old man roared with honest laughter, encouraged by the champagne, which he sent round liberally. The band that covered the young artist’s eyes was so thick he thought his future parents amiable. He enlivened them with a few jests in good taste and pleased everyone. In the evening, when the drawing-room—furnished with what Madame Guillaume called “everything handsome”—was deserted, while she flitted from table to chimney-piece, blowing out the wax-lights, the clear-sighted draper, always so when money was concerned, called Augustine to him, seated her on his knee, and spoke:

“My dear child, you shall marry your Sommervieux since you insist; you may, if you like, risk your capital in happiness. But I will not be hoodwinked by thirty thousand francs earned by spoiling good canvas. Money lightly earned is lightly spent. Did I not hear that hare-brained youngster declare this evening that money was made round that it might roll? If it is round for spendthrifts, it is flat for saving folks who pile it up. Now, my child, that fine gentleman talks of giving you carriages and diamonds! He has money, let him spend it on you; so be it. It is no concern of mine. But as to what I can give you, I will not have crown-pieces I picked up with toil wasted on frippery. Those who spend too fast never grow rich. A hundred thousand crowns, which is your fortune, will not buy up Paris. It is all very well to look forward to a few hundred thousand francs someday; I shall keep you waiting for them as long as possible, by Gad! So I took your lover aside, and a man who managed the Lecocq bankruptcy had little difficulty persuading the artist to marry under a settlement of his wife’s money on herself. I will keep an eye on the marriage contract to see that what he is to settle on you is safely tied up. So now, my child, I hope to be a grandfather, by Gad! I will begin at once to lay up for my grandchildren; but swear to me, here and now, never to sign money papers without my advice; and if I go soon to join old Father Chevrel, promise to consult young Lebas, your brother-in-law.”

“Yes, father, I swear it.”

At these gentle words the old man kissed his daughter on both cheeks. That night the lovers slept as soundly as Monsieur and Madame Guillaume.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Some months after that memorable Sunday the high altar of Saint-Leu saw two very different weddings. Augustine and Theodore looked radiant, elegantly dressed, a fine carriage at hand. Virginie, who had come in a hired fly with the rest of the family, humbly followed her younger sister, simply dressed and almost a shadow beside Augustine. Monsieur Guillaume had tried to have Virginie married before Augustine, but the priests persisted in addressing the more elegant bride. Neighbors praised Mademoiselle Virginie’s prudence in making the more substantial match and staying faithful to the neighborhood, while a few, envious of Augustine’s marrying an artist and a man of rank, taunted that the Guillaumes were becoming ambitious. An old fan-maker predicted prodigality would ruin the new husband, and father Guillaume privately prided himself on prudent settlements. In the evening, after a splendid ball and a substantial supper, Monsieur and Madame Guillaume stayed in the fine house in the Rue du Colombier where the wedding had been held; Monsieur and Madame Lebas returned by fly to the old home in the Rue Saint-Denis to mind the Cat and Racket. The artist, intoxicated with happiness, carried away Augustine, lifted her from the carriage in the Rue des Trois-Freres, and led her to an apartment embellished by all the arts.

The fever of passion that possessed Theodore made a year pass without a cloud for the young couple. Life did not weigh on them. Theodore lavished daily fioriture of enjoyment, varying transports of passion with soft languors of repose; when souls soar high the bodily union seems secondary. Augustine was too happy for reflection; she rode an undulating tide of rapture, surrendering to sanctioned married love. Simple and artless, she had no coquetry, no calculated reserves, none of the dominion a worldly girl gains over her husband; she loved without imagining so exquisite a life could end. Happy as her husband’s sole delight, she believed her devotion and obedience would always charm him. Love had made her brilliantly lovely; she took pride and confidence in her beauty, sure she could always reign over a man so easily kindled as Monsieur de Sommervieux. Thus marriage taught her only lessons of love.

Still the simple child from obscurity in the Rue Saint-Denis, she never sought the manners or tone of the world she now inhabited. Her words, being words of love, revealed a pliancy and sweet speech; but she used the language of women plunged in passion. When Augustine expressed an idea at odds with Theodore’s, he laughed—like one laughing at a foreigner’s first mistakes—a laugh that could annoy if not corrected.

By the end of that quick year Sommervieux felt the need to resume his work and habits. His wife was expecting their first child. He saw friends again. During the tedious discomforts of a first year of nursing he worked, no doubt, with zeal, but he sometimes sought diversion in society. The house he most frequented was that of the Duchesse de Carigliano, who at last drew the celebrated artist to her parties. When Augustine was well and the boy no longer required constant care, Theodore wished to taste the vanity of displaying a handsome wife in society and seeing other women envious.

To figure in drawing-rooms with the reflected lustre of his fame and to watch women’s envy was a new pleasure for Augustine; but it proved the last gleam of conjugal happiness. She first wounded her husband’s vanity by revealing her ignorance, the inelegance of her language, and the narrowness of her ideas. Sommervieux’s nature, subdued for two and a half years by the first transports of love, now recovered its old bent and habits. Poetry, painting, and the delights of imagination have inalienable rights over a lofty spirit. These cravings had not been starved in Theodore; they had been only diverted. Once the meadows of love had been ransacked and the artist’s hands held all they could, the scene changed. When he showed his wife sketches of his finest compositions she exclaimed, as her father had, “How pretty!”—a tepid admiration stemming not from feeling but from faith in love’s strength.

Augustine cared more for a look than for the finest picture; the only sublime she knew was that of the heart. Finally Theodore could not deny the cruel evidence—his wife was insensible to poetry; she did not inhabit his sphere, could not follow him in his vagaries, inventions, joys, and sorrows; she walked groveling in reality while his head was in the skies. Common minds cannot appreciate the continual suffering of a being who, though bound by affection, must suppress his soul’s flights and thrust down the images a magic power compels him to create. To him the torture was more intolerable because his feeling toward his companion demanded transparency, that they share aspirations of thought as fully as emotion. The demands of nature are inexorable. Sommervieux retreated to the silence of his studio, hoping living with artists would mould his wife and awaken supposed latent intelligence in her. But Augustine was too sincerely religious to be at ease among artists. At a dinner Theodore gave, a young painter said, with childlike lightness and unintelligible to her, “But, madame, your Paradise cannot be more beautiful than Raphael’s Transfiguration!—Well, and I got tired of looking at that.”

Thus Augustine entered this set with visible distrust. She restrained their freedom; artists who feel restraint are pitiless—they stay away or mock. Madame Guillaume had an extreme notion of the dignity due a married woman; Augustine, though she had often mocked it, could not wholly avoid imitating her mother’s primness. This propriety suggested a few epigrams and jests among the guests—reprisals Theater could not entirely ignore—but nothing seemed trivial to Theodore, whose spirit was open to outside impressions. A coldness crept over him and spread. To attain conjugal happiness one must climb a narrow ridge near a steep descent: the painter’s love was slipping. He viewed his wife as incapable of grasping moral considerations that, in his eyes, justified his singular behavior, and believed himself innocent in hiding thoughts and peccadilloes beyond a bourgeois conscience’s jurisdiction. Augustine wrapped herself in sullen and silent grief. These unconfessed feelings laid a shroud between them that thickened day by day. Though he still showed consideration, Augustine could not help seeing how he reserved for the world the wit and grace he had once lavished on her. She soon interpreted jocular speeches about men’s inconstancy in the worst light. She made no complaints, but her manner conveyed reproach.

Three years after their marriage this pretty young woman, once the envy of heedless folk in her handsome carriage and a sphere of glory and riches, became prey to intense grief. Her color faded; she reflected and compared; sorrow unfolded the first lessons of experience. She resolved to confine herself bravely to duty, hoping this would regain her husband’s affection. It did not. When Sommervieux, fired by work, returned from the studio, Augustine did not put away her knitting less quickly; he might find his wife mending household linen and his own with all the care of a housewife. She supplied generously and without murmur the money needed for his lavishness, economized strictly for herself, and managed domestic details with thrift. Such conduct clashes with the easy habits of artists, who, having long enjoyed ease, rarely probe the causes of ruin.

It is needless to note every shadow that darkened their honeymoon into utter blackness. One evening Augustine, who had long heard her husband speak with enthusiasm of the Duchesse de Carigliano, received from a friend malignly charitable warnings about the nature of the attachment Sommervieux had formed for that celebrated court flirt. At twenty-one, in the splendor of youth and beauty, she saw herself deserted for a woman of thirty-six. Feeling wretched in a world of glitter that to her was a blank, she could no longer understand the admiration she excited or the envy she provoked. Melancholy gave her features the sweetness of resignation and the pallor of scorned love. Soon she too was courted by fascinating men; but she remained lonely and virtuous. Some contemptuous words from her husband filled her with indescribable despair. A sinister flash showed breaches—due to her humble education—that hindered a perfect union of souls with Theodore’s; she loved him enough to absolve him and condemn herself. She shed tears of blood and perceived too late that there are mesalliances of spirit as well as of rank and habit. As she recalled their early raptures she understood the full extent of lost happiness and accepted that so rich a harvest of love was itself a whole life, paid for by sorrow. Yet she loved too truly to lose hope. At twenty-one she dared to educate herself and make her imagination worthy, at least in understanding, of what she admired. “If I am not a poet,” she thought, “at any rate I will understand poetry.”

With the will and energy passion can inspire, Madame de Sommervieux set about altering her character, manners, and habits; by devouring books she became less ignorant, but lightness of wit and conversational grace are gifts of nature or of cradle education. She could appreciate music and literature, but could not sing or converse with true taste; her refractory memory resisted cultivation. Home-bred religious notions and prejudices opposed full emancipation of her mind. A preconception against her had taken hold in Theodore’s mind, and she could not dispel it. The artist laughed at those who flattered him about his wife; his irony overawed the pathetic young creature so that she trembled in his presence. Hampered by her eager desire to please, her wits and knowledge vanished into one absorbing feeling. Even her fidelity irritated the unfaithful husband, who seemed to stigmatize her virtue as insensibility. Augustine tried in vain to abdicate reason, yield to her husband’s caprices, and devote herself to his vanity. Her sacrifices bore no fruit. Perhaps they had both missed the critical moment when souls can meet in comprehension. One day the young wife’s too sensitive heart received a blow that stretched the bonds of feeling; she withdrew into solitude. Before long, a fatal thought suggested seeking counsel and comfort in her family’s bosom.

So one morning she went to the plain, grotesque facade of the humble, silent home of her childhood. She sighed as she looked up at the sash-window from which she had once sent her first kiss to the man who now shed as much sorrow as glory on her life. Nothing had changed in the cavern, though the drapery business had restarted. Augustine’s sister sat at the desk in their mother’s old place. The brother-in-law, pen behind his ear, hardly paused—engrossed in business and the signs of stock-taking visible around him. He begged her excuse. She was received coldly by her sister, who still bore a grudge—Augustine in finery had rarely visited except when passing by. The wife of the prudent Lebas, suspecting money to be the motive for this early call, maintained a reserve that more than once made Augustine smile. The painter’s wife noted that, beyond cap and lappets, her mother had found in Virginie a successor who upheld the ancient honor of the Cat and Racket. At breakfast she observed management changes that did credit to Lebas’ good sense: assistants did not rise before dessert, they were allowed to talk, and the abundant meal spoke of ease without luxury. She found a ticket for a box at the Francais where she remembered seeing her sister; Madame Lebas had a cashmere shawl showing her husband’s generosity. In short, the couple kept pace with the times. During the two-thirds of the day she spent there, Augustine was moved by the equable happiness—devoid of storm yet free from passion—enjoyed by this well-matched pair. Not finding great love with his wife, Virginie had worked to create it; having learned to esteem and care for his wife, the time required for that germination assured Joseph Lebas of its durability. Hence, when Augustine plaintively described her situation, she encountered the flood of commonplace morality furnished by Rue Saint-Denis tradition.

“The mischief is done, wife,” said Joseph Lebas; “we must try to give our sister good advice.” The clever tradesman ponderously analyzed legal and customary resources she might employ to escape her crisis; he ranked every argument as though merchandise, weighed them, and concluded by showing the necessity for violent steps, which could not satisfy the love she still had for her husband. Augustine thanked them and returned home even more undecided. She then went to the house in the Rue du Colombier intending to confide in her father and mother, like a sick person who, in desperate plight, tries every prescription and even trusts old wives’ remedies.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The old people received their daughter with an effusiveness that touched her deeply. Her visit brought them a little change, and to them that was worth a fortune. For four years they had gone their way like navigators without a goal or compass. Sitting by the chimney they talked over their disasters under the old law of maximum, their great investments in cloth, how they had weathered bankruptcies, and above all the famous failure of Lecocq, Monsieur Guillaume’s battle of Marengo. When they had exhausted lawsuit tales, they recapitulated their most profitable stock-takings and told each other old stories of the Saint-Denis quarter. At two o’clock old Guillaume went to cast an eye on the business at the Cat and Racket; on his way back he called at the shops of his former rivals, who hoped to inveigle the old draper into some risky discount, which he never refused point-blank. Two good Normandy horses were wasting their fat in the stables; Madame Guillaume used them only to drag her to high Mass on Sundays. Three times a week the worthy couple kept open house. By the influence of his son-in-law Sommervieux, Monsieur Guillaume had been named to the consulting board for Army clothing. Since her husband had risen, Madame Guillaume decided she must receive; her rooms were crammed with gold and silver ornaments and tasteless but valuable furniture, so that the simplest room looked like a chapel. Economy and expense struggled for the upper hand in every accessory, as if Monsieur Guillaume had sought a good investment even in a candlestick. In the midst of this bazaar, where splendor revealed the owner’s lack of occupation, Sommervieux’s famous picture held place of honor; Monsieur and Madame Guillaume turned their eyes, harnessed with spectacles, twenty times a day on this presentment of their past life, their chief consolation.

The appearance of the mansion and rooms, and these two beings, cast away as it were on a rock far from the world and the ideas which are life, startled Augustine. She could here contemplate the sequel of the scene of which the first part had struck her at Lebas's house—a life of stir without movement, a mechanical and instinctive existence. She felt an indefinable pride in her troubles, reflecting that they arose from eighteen months of happiness worth a thousand lives like this; its vacuity seemed horrible. Yet she concealed this not very charitable feeling, showing her newly acquired accomplishments of mind and the ingratiating tenderness love had revealed, disposing her parents to listen to her matrimonial grievances. Old people have a weakness for such confidences. Madame Guillaume wanted the most trivial details of that alien life, which to her seemed almost fabulous. The travels of Baron de la Houtan, which she began again and again and never finished, told her nothing more unheard-of concerning the Canadian savages.

“What, child, your husband shuts himself into a room with naked women! And you are so simple as to believe that he draws them?” the grandmother cried, laying aside her spectacles and clasping her hands on her knees.

“But, mother, all artists are obliged to have models.”

“He took good care not to tell us that when he asked leave to marry you. If I had known it, I would never have given my daughter to a man who followed such a trade. Religion forbids such horrors; they are immoral. And at what hour does he come home?”

“At one o’clock—two—”

The old folks looked at each other in amazement.

“Then he gambles?” said Monsieur Guillaume. “In my day only gamblers stayed out so late.”

Augustine scorned the accusation.

“He must keep you up through dreadful nights waiting for him,” said Madame Guillaume. “But you go to bed, don’t you? And when he has lost, the wretch wakes you.”

“No, mamma; on the contrary, he sometimes in good spirits suggests I should get up and go into the woods.”

“The woods! At that hour? Then his bedroom and sitting-room are not enough, and he must run about? He wants to get rid of you. Did one ever hear of a man settled in life riding about like a warlock?”

“But, mother, you do not understand that he must have excitement to fire his genius. He is fond of scenes—”

“I would make scenes for him!” cried Madame Guillaume. “How can you show any consideration to such a man? In the first place, I don’t like his drinking water; it is not wholesome. Why does he object to see a woman eating? What queer notion is that! He is mad. A man cannot leave his home without a word and never come back for ten days, then tell you he has been to Dieppe to paint the sea. He crams you with tales too absurd.”

Augustine opened her lips to defend him, but Madame Guillaume enjoined silence, and her mother continued harshly: “Don’t talk to me about the man! He never set foot in church except to marry you. People without religion are capable of anything. Did Guillaume ever dream of hiding anything from me, of spending three days without saying a word and chattering afterwards like a blind magpie?”

“My dear mother, you judge superior people too severely. If their ideas were the same as other folks’, they would not be men of genius.”

“Very well, then let men of genius stop at home and not get married. What! A man of genius is to make his wife miserable? And because he is a genius it is all right! Genius, genius! It is not so very clever to say black one minute and white the next, as he does, to interrupt other people, to dance such rigs at home, never to let you know which foot you are to stand on, to compel his wife never to be amused unless my lord is in gay spirits, and to be dull when he is dull.”

“But, mother, the very nature of such imaginations—”

“What are such ‘imaginations’?” Madame Guillaume went on. “What possesses a man that all on a sudden, without consulting a doctor, he takes it into his head to eat nothing but vegetables? If indeed it were from religious motives, it might do him some good—but he has no more religion than a Huguenot. Was there ever a man who loved horses better than his fellow-creatures, had his hair curled like a heathen, laid statues under muslin coverlets, shut his shutters in broad day to work by lamp-light? There, get along; if he were not so grossly immoral, he would be fit for a lunatic asylum. Consult Monsieur Loraux, the priest at Saint Sulpice, ask his opinion, and he will tell you your husband does not behave like a Christian.”

“Oh, mother, can you believe—?”

“Yes, I do believe. You loved him, and see none of these things. I remember in the early days after your marriage I met him in the Champs-Élysées. He was on horseback. One minute he galloped as hard as he could, and then pulled up to a walk. I said to myself, ‘There is a man devoid of judgement.’”

“Ah, ha!” cried Monsieur Guillaume, “how wise I was to have your money settled on yourself with such a queer fellow for a husband!”

When Augustine, imprudently, set forth her serious grievances, the two old people were speechless with indignation. Madame Guillaume soon spoke the word “divorce.” At that the apathetic old draper seemed to wake. Prompted by paternal love and the excitement such proceedings would bring into his uneventful life, Monsieur Guillaume took up the matter. He made himself leader of an application for divorce, planned it, almost argued the case; he offered to defray all costs, see the lawyers, plead the cause, and move heaven and earth. Madame de Sommervieux was frightened; she refused her father’s services, saying she would not be separated from her husband even if ten times as unhappy, and would talk no more about her sorrows. Overwhelmed by her parents’ little consoling kindnesses, she went away feeling the impossibility of making a superior mind intelligible to weak intellects. She learned that a wife must hide from everyone, even her parents, woes for which sympathy is hard to find. The storms of the upper spheres are appreciated only by those who inhabit them. We can only be judged by our equals.

Thus Augustine found herself thrown back on the horror of her meditations in the cold atmosphere of her home. Study was indifferent to her, since it had not brought back her husband’s heart. Initiated into the secret of these souls of fire but bereft of their resources, she was compelled to share their sorrows without sharing their pleasures. She was disgusted with the world, which seemed mean and small compared to incidents of passion. In short, her life was a failure.

One evening an idea flashed upon her that lighted her dark grief like a beam: she would go to the Duchesse de Carigliano, not to ask her to return her husband—but to learn the arts by which he had been captured; to engage the fine lady’s interest for the mother of her lover’s children; to make her the instrument of Augustine’s happiness, since she was the cause of her wretchedness.

So one day Augustine, timid but armed with courage, got into her carriage at two in the afternoon to seek admittance to the boudoir of the famous coquette, visible only at that hour. Madame de Sommervieux had not yet seen the ancient mansions of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. As she passed stately corridors, handsome staircases, and vast drawing-rooms full of flowers in midwinter and decorated with aristocratic taste, Augustine felt a terrible clutch at her heart; she coveted the secrets of an elegance of which she had no idea and breathed an air of grandeur that explained her husband’s attraction. In the Duchess’s private rooms she was filled with jealousy and despair as she admired luxurious furniture, draperies, hangings; here disorder was a grace, luxury affected a contempt of splendor. The warm air’s fragrance flattered the senses without offending. Accessories harmonized with a view through plate-glass windows of lawns planted with evergreens. It was bewitching, the art of it not perceptible. The whole spirit of the mistress pervaded the drawing-room where Augustine awaited her. She tried to divine her rival’s character from the scattered objects; all was a sealed letter. She saw only that the Duchess was a superior woman. Then a painful thought came: was a simple, loving heart enough for an artist? If she had been brought up like this siren, their weapons might have been equal.

“But I am not at home!” the Duchess snarled sharply in the adjoining boudoir.

“The lady is in there,” replied the maid.

“Show her in,” the Duchess said, assuming dulcet tones.

Augustine entered shyly. At the end of the boudoir the Duchess lounged on an ottoman like a Greek statue, dark velvet giving relief to every charm, a subdued light flattering her beauty. Rare flowers rose from costly Sèvres vases. Augustine approached so noiselessly she caught a glance from the enchantress that seemed to say to an unseen person, “Stay; you will see a pretty woman.”

A young colonel—handsome, dashing, self-satisfied—sat there, twirling a riding whip and admiring Augustine’s modesty in contrast to the Duchess’s haughtiness. The Duchess dismissed him with a cool “Good-bye, then, Monsieur d’Aiglemont, we shall meet in the Bois de Boulogne,” then turned to Augustine.

“Madame,” Augustine said in a broken voice, “what I am about to do will seem strange; but there is a madness of despair which excuses much. I understand why Théodore prefers your house, and why your mind has power over him. I have only to look into myself to find reasons. But I am devoted to my husband, madame. Two years of tears have not effaced his image. In my folly I dared to dream of contesting with you; I have come to ask by what means I may triumph. Help me to win back Sommervieux’s regard—I have no hope but in you. Tell me how you could please him and make him forget the first days—” she broke down and sobbed.

“What a child you are, my dear little beauty!” said the Duchess, touched despite herself by such homage from an almost perfect virtue. She took Augustine’s handkerchief and wiped her tears, murmuring monosyllables of compassion. Then, grasping Augustine’s hands, she spoke gently: “My first warning is not to weep so bitterly; tears disfigure. We must learn to deal firmly with sorrows that make us ill, for love does not linger by a sick-bed. Melancholy may lend a certain grace at first but ends by blighting the face. Besides, our tyrants insist their slaves be cheerful.”

“But, madame, I cannot control my heart,” Augustine said.

“So much the worse, sweet child. But I fancy I know your story. If your husband is unfaithful, understand that I am not his accomplice. I liked having him in my drawing-room out of vanity; he was famous, and he went nowhere. I will only reveal one thing because it may help bring him back to you and punish him for his audacity. We women should admire men of genius as a spectacle, but never live with them. Those who have married often chose insignificant wives who governed them; by noting qualities they lacked and possessing or feigning them, they impressed their husbands. These lofty souls have a speck of madness we ought to use. Resolve to have the upper hand and never deviate; bring your actions, ideas, cajolery to bear on that aim, and you will subjugate their capricious natures.”

“Good heavens!” cried Augustine. “And this is life. It is a warfare—”

“In which we must always threaten,” laughed the Duchess. “Our power is factitious. We must never allow a man to despise us; it is impossible to recover from such a fall but by odious maneuvering. Come,” she added, “I will give you a means of bringing your husband to his senses.”

She rose, guiding the guileless apprentice through a back staircase to the reception rooms. Pressing a secret spring, she added with a gleam of shrewdness, “The Duc de Carigliano adores me. He dare not enter this door without my leave. He commands thousands of soldiers; before me he is afraid.”

They entered a sumptuous gallery where Theodore’s portrait of Mademoiselle Guillaume hung. On seeing it, Augustine cried out.

“I knew it was no longer in my house,” she said, “but—here!”

“My dear child, I asked for it merely to see what pitch of idiocy a man of genius may reach,” the Duchess replied. “Sooner or later I should have returned it. While we finish our talk I will have it carried to your carriage. If, armed with such a talisman, you are not your husband’s mistress for a hundred years, you are not a woman.”

Augustine kissed the Duchess’s hand; the lady clasped her to her heart, touched because she would forget her by morning. This scene might have destroyed the candor of a less virtuous woman: the astute politics of the higher spheres were alien to Augustine as were Joseph Lebas’s narrow reasoning or Madame Guillaume’s vapid morality. Strange are results of false positions into which a single mistake may bring us! Augustine was like an Alpine cowherd surprised by an avalanche: hesitate and you are lost. In such a crisis the heart steels itself or breaks.

Madame de Sommervieux returned home in agitation. Her conversation with the Duchess had roused contradictory thoughts. Like the fabled sheep full of courage in the wolf’s absence, she planned admirable conduct: coquettish stratagems, feigned aloofness; she rehearsed speeches which seemed persuasive away from the target. Then, picturing Théodore’s steady gaze, she quaked. On learning he would not be home to dinner she felt a thrill of joy; a short respite seemed an eternity. She placed the portrait in her room and waited for her husband in the agonies of hope. Midnight struck when the groom called and the artist’s carriage rumbled in.

“What is the meaning of this illumination?” asked Théodore as he came into her room.

Augustine seized the moment; she threw herself into his arms and pointed to the portrait. The artist stood rigid, eyes turning between Augustine and the accusing dress. Watching his expressive brow gather like clouds, the frightened wife felt her blood curdle when, in a hollow voice, he began to question her.

“Where did you find that picture?”

“The Duchesse de Carigliano returned it to me.”

“You asked her for it?”

“I did not know she had it.”

The sweetness of Augustine’s voice might have touched a cannibal, but not a wounded artist. “It is worthy of her!” he thundered. “I will be avenged! She shall die of shame; I will paint her! Yes, I will paint her as Messalina stealing out at night from the palace of Claudius.”

“Theodore!” said a faint voice.

“I will kill her!”

“My dear—”

“She is in love with that little cavalry colonel, because he rides well—”

“Theodore!”

“Let me be!” he roared.

It would be odious to describe the whole scene. The frenzy of passion prompted acts and words which any woman not so young as Augustine would have called madness.

At eight the next morning Madame Guillaume found her daughter pale, eyes red, hair in disorder, holding a handkerchief soaked with tears, gazing at the floor strewn with torn fragments of a dress and the broken pieces of a gilt picture-frame. Augustine, almost senseless with grief, pointed to the wreck with a gesture of deep despair.

“I don’t know that the loss is very great!” cried the old mistress of the Cat and Racket. “It was like you, no doubt; but I am told a man on the boulevard paints lovely portraits for fifty crowns.”

“Oh, mother!” said Augustine.

“Poor child, you are right,” replied Madame Guillaume, who misinterpreted her daughter’s expression. “Confide your sorrows to me, and I will comfort you. Did I not tell you long ago that the man was mad! Your maid has told me pretty stories. Why, he must be a perfect monster!”

Augustine laid a finger on her white lips, imploring silence. During that dreadful night misery had led her to patient resignation which in mothers and loving wives transcends in its effects all human energy, and perhaps reveals in women chords God has withheld from men.

An inscription engraved on a broken column in the cemetery at Montmartre states that Madame de Sommervieux died at twenty-seven. In those simple words one of the timid creature’s friends reads the last scene of a tragedy. Every year on All Souls’ Day he passes the youthful monument and wonders whether it does not take a stronger woman than Augustine to endure the violent embrace of genius.

“The humble and modest flowers of the valley,” he reflects, “perish perhaps when transplanted too near the skies, to the region where storms gather and the sun is scorching.”

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Aiglemont, General, Marquis Victor d’
  The Firm of Nucingen
  A Woman of Thirty

Birotteau, Cesar
  Cesar Birotteau
  A Bachelor’s Establishment

Camusot
  A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  A Bachelor’s Establishment
  Cousin Pons
  The Muse of the Department
  Cesar Birotteau

Cardot, Jean-Jerome-Severin
  A Start in Life
  Lost Illusions
  A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  A Bachelor’s Establishment
  Cesar Birotteau

Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de
  Father Goriot
  Sarrasine

Carigliano, Duchesse de
  A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  The Peasantry
  The Member for Arcis

Guillaume
  Cesar Birotteau

Lebas, Joseph
  Cesar Birotteau
  Cousin Betty

Lebas, Madame Joseph (Virginie)
  Cesar Birotteau
  Cousin Betty

Lourdois
  Cesar Birotteau

Rabourdin, Xavier
  The Government Clerks
  Cesar Birotteau
  The Middle Classes

Roguin, Madame
  Cesar Birotteau
  Pierrette
  A Second Home
  A Daughter of Eve

Sommervieux, Theodore de
  The Government Clerks
  Modeste Mignon

Sommervieux, Madame Theodore de (Augustine)
  At the Sign of the Cat and Racket
  Cesar Birotteau
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################