The incident recorded in this sketch took place toward the end of November 1809, when Napoleon’s fugitive empire reached the height of its splendor. The trumpet-blasts of Wagram still echoed through the Austrian monarchy. Peace was being stitched between France and the Coalition. Kings and princes revolved around Napoleon, who dragged all Europe in his train — a magnificent experiment of power later displayed at Dresden. Paris, contemporaries say, never saw entertainments more superb than those surrounding the sovereign’s marriage to an Austrian archduchess. Never, even in the grandest days of the Monarchy, had so many crowned heads thronged the Seine; never had the French aristocracy seemed so rich and resplendent. Diamonds on women’s dresses and gold and silver embroidery on uniforms contrasted sharply with Republic penury, so that the wealth of the globe appeared to roll through Paris drawing-rooms. Intoxication had turned the brains of this Empire of a day. All the military, even their chief, reveled like parvenus in treasure won by a million men with worsted epaulettes, their demands satisfied by a few yards of red ribbon.

At this time most women affected the light morals of Louis XV’s reign. Whether imitating the fallen monarchy’s tone, or following examples set by some Imperial family members, both sexes flung themselves into pleasure with an intrepidity that seemed to forebode the end of the world. Another cause of license was women’s infatuation with the military, a frenzy consonant with the Emperor’s views, so he did not check it. Frequent calls to arms — which made every treaty an armistice — left passions open to sudden endings as abrupt as the Commander-in-chief’s decisions about busbys, pelisses, and aiguillettes, which so fascinated the fair sex. Hearts were as nomadic as the regiments; between the first and fifth bulletins from the Grand Armée a woman might be in succession mistress, wife, mother, and widow.

What drew women to soldiers — the prospect of early widowhood, hope of a jointure, desire for a name in history, the belief that their secrets would die on the battlefield, or the noble charm of courage — is a question for historians. Likely all these motives combined. Laurels hid many errors; women ardently preferred brave adventurers as the source of honor, wealth, or pleasure; for young girls an epaulette — the hieroglyphic of a future — signified happiness and liberty.

A feature of the period was an unbridled mania for everything glittering. Fireworks and diamonds were in vogue. Men, as greedy as women for these translucent pebbles, displayed them lavishly. Possibly the need to carry plunder in portable form made gems fashionable in the army. A man was not ridiculous then, as he might later be considered, if his shirt-frill or his fingers blazed with large diamonds. Murat, Oriental by nature, set the example of preposterous luxury to modern soldiers.

The Comte de Gondreville, formerly Citizen Malin, whose rise had made him famous and who now lived like a Lucullus of the Conservative Senate, postponed an entertainment in honor of the peace only to outshine rivals and pay court to Napoleon. Ambassadors, the Empire’s most important personages, and even princes assembled in the wealthy senator’s drawing-rooms, eying favors to come. Dancing flagged; everyone watched for the Emperor, whose presence the Count had promised. Napoleon would have come but for a scene that evening with Josephine — the incident that foreshadowed the couple’s divorce. Kept secret then but recorded by history, it alone kept Napoleon away.

The prettiest women in Paris, eager to attend on mere hearsay, besieged the house with luxury, coquetry, elegance, and beauty. The financial world, proud of its riches, challenged the splendor of generals and officials newly gorged with orders, titles, and honors. These grand balls became opportunities for wealthy families to present their heiresses to Napoleon’s Praetorian Guard, in the foolish hope of exchanging fortunes for uncertain favors. Women trusting in beauty came to test their power. There, as elsewhere, amusement was a blind: calm, smiling faces and placid brows covered sordid interests; expressions of friendship were often lies, and more than one man distrusted his friends more than his enemies.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
These remarks are necessary to explain the incidents of the little imbroglio which is the subject of this study, and the picture, softened as it is, of the tone then dominant in Paris drawing-rooms.

“Turn your eyes a little towards the pedestal supporting that candelabrum—do you see a young lady with her hair drawn back a la Chinoise?—There, in the corner to the left; she has bluebells in the knot of chestnut curls which fall in clusters on her head. Do you not see her? She is so pale you might fancy she was ill, delicate-looking, and very small; there—now she is turning her head this way; her almond-shaped blue eyes, so delightfully soft, look as if they were made expressly for tears. Look, look! She is bending forward to see Madame de Vaudremont below the crowd of heads in constant motion; the high head-dresses prevent her having a clear view.”

“I see her now, my dear fellow. You had only to say that she had the whitest skin of all the women here; I should have known whom you meant. I had noticed her before; she has the loveliest complexion I ever admired. From hence I defy you to see against her throat the pearls between the sapphires of her necklace. But she is a prude or a coquette, for the tucker of her bodice scarcely lets one suspect the beauty of her bust. What shoulders! what lily-whiteness!”

“Who is she?” asked the first speaker.

“Ah! that I do not know.”

“Aristocrat!—Do you want to keep them all to yourself, Montcornet?”

“You of all men to banter me!” replied Montcornet, with a smile. “Do you think you have a right to insult a poor general like me because, being a happy rival of Soulanges, you cannot even turn on your heel without alarming Madame de Vaudremont? Or is it because I came only a month ago into the Promised Land? How insolent you can be, you men in office, who sit glued to your chairs while we are dodging shot and shell! Come, Monsieur le Maitre des Requetes, allow us to glean in the field of which you can only have precarious possession from the moment when we evacuate it. The deuce is in it! We have a right to live! My good friend, if you knew the German women, you would, I believe, do me a good turn with the Parisian you love best.”

“Well, General, since you have vouchsafed to turn your attention to that lady, whom I never saw till now, have the charity to tell me if you have seen her dance.”

“Why, my dear Martial, where have you dropped from? If you are ever sent with an embassy, I have small hopes of your success. Do not you see a triple rank of the most undaunted coquettes of Paris between her and the swarm of dancing men that buzz under the chandelier? And was it not only by the help of your eyeglass that you were able to discover her at all in the corner by that pillar, where she seems buried in the gloom, in spite of the candles blazing above her head? Between her and us there is such a sparkle of diamonds and glances, so many floating plumes, such a flutter of lace, of flowers and curls, that it would be a real miracle if any dancer could detect her among those stars. Why, Martial, how is it that you have not understood her to be the wife of some sous-prefet from Lippe or Dyle, who has come to try to get her husband promoted?”

“Oh, he will be!” exclaimed the Master of Appeals quickly.

“I doubt it,” replied the Colonel of Cuirassiers, laughing. “She seems as raw in intrigue as you are in diplomacy. I dare bet, Martial, that you do not know how she got into that place.”

The lawyer looked at the Colonel of Cuirassiers with an expression as much of contempt as of curiosity.

“Well,” proceeded Montcornet, “she arrived, I have no doubt, punctually at nine, the first of the company perhaps, and probably she greatly embarrassed the Comtesse de Gondreville, who cannot put two ideas together. Repulsed by the mistress of the house, routed from chair to chair by each newcomer, and driven into the darkness of this little corner, she allowed herself to be walled in, the victim of the jealousy of the other ladies, who would gladly have buried that dangerous beauty. She had, of course, no friend to encourage her to maintain the place she first held in the front rank; then each of those treacherous fair ones would have enjoined on the men of her circle on no account to take out our poor friend, under pain of the severest punishment. That, my dear fellow, is the way in which those sweet faces, in appearance so tender and so artless, would have formed a coalition against the stranger, and that without a word beyond the question, ‘Tell me, dear, do you know that little woman in blue?’—Look here, Martial, if you care to run the gauntlet of more flattering glances and inviting questions than you will ever again meet in the whole of your life, just try to get through the triple rampart which defends that Queen of Dyle, or Lippe, or Charente. You will see whether the dullest woman of them all will not be equal to inventing some wile that would hinder the most determined man from bringing the plaintive stranger to the light. Does it not strike you that she looks like an elegy?”

“Do you think so, Montcornet? Then she must be a married woman?”

“Why not a widow?”

“She would be less passive,” said the lawyer, laughing.

“She is perhaps the widow of a man who is gambling,” replied the handsome Colonel.

“To be sure; since the peace there are so many widows of that class!” said Martial. “But my dear Montcornet, we are a couple of simpletons. That face is still too ingenuous, there is too much youth and freshness on the brow and temples for her to be married. What splendid flesh-tints! Nothing has sunk in the modeling of the nose. Lips, chin, everything in her face is as fresh as a white rosebud, though the expression is veiled, as it were, by the clouds of sadness. Who can it be that makes that young creature weep?”

“Women cry for so little,” said the Colonel.

“I do not know,” replied Martial; “but she does not cry because she is left there without a partner; her grief is not of to-day. It is evident that she has beautified herself for this evening with intention. I would wager that she is in love already.”

“Bah! She is perhaps the daughter of some German princeling; no one talks to her,” said Montcornet.

“Dear! how unhappy a poor child may be!” Martial went on. “Can there be anything more graceful and refined than our little stranger? Well, not one of those furies who stand round her, and who believe that they can feel, will say a word to her. If she would but speak, we should see if she has fine teeth.

“Bless me, you boil over like milk at the least increase of temperature!” cried the Colonel, a little nettled at so soon finding a rival in his friend.

“What!” exclaimed the lawyer, without heeding the Colonel’s question. “Can nobody here tell us the name of this exotic flower?”

“Some lady companion!” said Montcornet.

“What next? A companion! wearing sapphires fit for a queen, and a dress of Malines lace? Tell that to the marines, General. You, too, would not shine in diplomacy if, in the course of your conjectures, you jump in a breath from a German princess to a lady companion.”

Montcornet stopped a man by taking his arm—a fat little man, whose iron-gray hair and clever eyes were to be seen at the lintel of every doorway, and who mingled unceremoniously with the various groups which welcomed him respectfully.

“Gondreville, my friend,” said Montcornet, “who is that quite charming little woman sitting out there under that huge candelabrum?”

“The candelabrum? Ravrio’s work; Isabey made the design.”

“Oh, I recognized your lavishness and taste; but the lady?”

“Ah! I do not know. Some friend of my wife’s, no doubt.”

“Or your mistress, you old rascal.”

“No, on my honor. The Comtesse de Gondreville is the only person capable of inviting people whom no one knows.”

In spite of this very acrimonious comment, the fat little man’s lips did not lose the smile which the Colonel’s suggestion had brought to them. Montcornet returned to the lawyer, who had rejoined a neighboring group, intent on asking, but in vain, for information as to the fair unknown. He grasped Martial’s arm, and said in his ear:

“My dear Martial, mind what you are about. Madame de Vaudremont has been watching you for some minutes with ominous attentiveness; she is a woman who can guess by the mere movement of your lips what you say to me; our eyes have already told her too much; she has perceived and followed their direction, and I suspect that at this moment she is thinking even more than we are of the little blue lady.”

“That is too old a trick in warfare, my dear Montcornet! However, what do I care? Like the Emperor, when I have made a conquest, I keep it.”

“Martial, your fatuity cries out for a lesson. What! you, a civilian, and so lucky as to be the husband-designate of Madame de Vaudremont, a widow of two-and-twenty, burdened with four thousand napoleons a year—a woman who slips such a diamond as this on your finger,” he added, taking the lawyer’s left hand, which the young man complacently allowed; “and, to crown all, you affect the Lovelace, just as if you were a colonel and obliged to keep up the reputation of the military in home quarters! Fie, fie! Only think of all you may lose.”

“At any rate, I shall not lose my liberty,” replied Martial, with a forced laugh.

He cast a passionate glance at Madame de Vaudremont, who responded only by a smile of some uneasiness, for she had seen the Colonel examining the lawyer’s ring.

“Listen to me, Martial. If you flutter round my young stranger, I shall set to work to win Madame de Vaudremont.”

“You have my full permission, my dear Cuirassier, but you will not gain this much,” and the young Maitre des Requetes put his polished thumb-nail under an upper tooth with a little mocking click.

“Remember that I am unmarried,” said the Colonel; “that my sword is my whole fortune; and that such a challenge is setting Tantalus down to a banquet which he will devour.”

“Prrr.”

This defiant roll of consonants was the only reply to the Colonel’s declaration, as Martial looked him from head to foot before turning away.

The fashion of the time required men to wear at a ball white kerseymere breeches and silk stockings. This pretty costume showed to great advantage the perfection of Montcornet’s fine shape. He was five-and-thirty, and attracted attention by his stalwart height, insisted on for the Cuirassiers of the Imperial Guard whose handsome uniform enhanced the dignity of his figure, still youthful in spite of the stoutness occasioned by living on horseback. A black moustache emphasized the frank expression of a thoroughly soldierly countenance, with a broad, high forehead, an aquiline nose, and bright red lips. Montcornet’s manner, stamped with a certain superiority due to the habit of command, might please a woman sensible enough not to aim at making a slave of her husband. The Colonel smiled as he looked at the lawyer, one of his favorite college friends, whose small figure made it necessary for Montcornet to look down a little as he answered his raillery with a friendly glance.

Baron Martial de la Roche-Hugon was a young Provencal patronized by Napoleon; his fate might probably be some splendid embassy. He had won the Emperor by his Italian suppleness and a genius for intrigue, a drawing-room eloquence, and a knowledge of manners, which are so good a substitute for the higher qualities of a sterling man. Through young and eager, his face had already acquired the rigid brilliancy of tinned iron, one of the indispensable characteristics of diplomatists, which allows them to conceal their emotions and disguise their feelings, unless, indeed, this impassibility indicates an absence of all emotion and the death of every feeling. The heart of a diplomate may be regarded as an insoluble problem, for the three most illustrious ambassadors of the time have been distinguished by perdurable hatreds and most romantic attachments.

Martial, however, was one of those men who are capable of reckoning on the future in the midst of their intensest enjoyment; he had already learned to judge the world, and hid his ambition under the fatuity of a lady-killer, cloaking his talent under the commonplace of mediocrity as soon as he observed the rapid advancement of those men who gave the master little umbrage.

The two friends now had to part with a cordial grasp of hands. The introductory tune, warning the ladies to form in squares for a fresh quadrille, cleared the men away from the space they had filled while talking in the middle of the large room. This hurried dialogue had taken place during the usual interval between two dances, in front of the fireplace of the great drawing-room of Gondreville’s mansion. The questions and answers of this very ordinary ballroom gossip had been almost whispered by each of the speakers into his neighbor’s ear. At the same time, the chandeliers and the flambeaux on the chimney-shelf shed such a flood of light on the two friends that their faces, strongly illuminated, failed, in spite of their diplomatic discretion, to conceal the faint expression of their feelings either from the keen-sighted countess or the artless stranger. This espionage of people’s thoughts is perhaps to idle persons one of the pleasures they find in society, while numbers of disappointed numskulls are bored there without daring to own it.

Fully to appreciate the interest of this conversation, it is necessary to relate an incident which would presently serve as an invisible bond, drawing together the actors in this little drama, who were at present scattered through the rooms.

At about eleven o’clock, just as the dancers were returning to their seats, the company had observed the entrance of the handsomest woman in Paris, the queen of fashion, the only person wanting to the brilliant assembly. She made it a rule never to appear till the moment when a party had reached that pitch of excited movement which does not allow the women to preserve much longer the freshness of their faces or of their dress. This brief hour is, as it were, the springtime of a ball. An hour after, when pleasure falls flat and fatigue is encroaching, everything is spoilt. Madame de Vaudremont never committed the blunder of remaining at a party to be seen with drooping flowers, hair out of curl, tumbled frills, and a face like every other that sleep is courting—not always without success. She took good care not to let her beauty be seen drowsy, as her rivals did; she was so clever as to keep up her reputation for smartness by always leaving a ballroom in brilliant order, as she had entered it. Women whispered to each other with a feeling of envy that she planned and wore as many different dresses as the parties she went to in one evening.

On the present occasion Madame de Vaudremont was not destined to be free to leave when she would the ballroom she had entered in triumph. Pausing for a moment on the threshold, she shot swift but observant glances on the women present, hastily scrutinizing their dresses to assure herself that her own eclipsed them all.

The illustrious beauty presented herself to the admiration of the crowd at the same moment with one of the bravest colonels of the Guards’ Artillery and the Emperor’s favorite, the Comte de Soulanges. The transient and fortuitous association of these two had about it a certain air of mystery. On hearing the names announced of Monsieur de Soulanges and the Comtesse de Vaudremont, a few women sitting by the wall rose, and men, hurrying in from the side-rooms, pressed forward to the principal doorway. One of the jesters who are always to be found in any large assembly said, as the Countess and her escort came in, that “women had quite as much curiosity about seeing a man who was faithful to his passion as men had in studying a woman who was difficult to enthrall.”

Though the Comte de Soulanges, a young man of about two-and-thirty, was endowed with the nervous temperament which in a man gives rise to fine qualities, his slender build and pale complexion were not at first sight attractive; his black eyes betrayed great vivacity, but he was taciturn in company, and there was nothing in his appearance to reveal the gift for oratory which subsequently distinguished him, on the Right, in the legislative assembly under the Restoration.

The Comtesse de Vaudremont, a tall woman, rather fat, with a skin of dazzling whiteness, a small head that she carried well, and the immense advantage of inspiring love by the graciousness of her manner, was one of those beings who keep all the promise of their beauty.

The pair, who for a few minutes were the centre of general observation, did not for long give curiosity an opportunity of exercising itself about them. The Colonel and the Countess seemed perfectly to understand that accident had placed them in an awkward position. Martial, as they came forward, had hastened to join the group of men by the fireplace, that he might watch Madame de Vaudremont with the jealous anxiety of the first flame of passion, from behind the heads which formed a sort of rampart; a secret voice seemed to warn him that the success on which he prided himself might perhaps be precarious. But the coldly polite smile with which the Countess thanked Monsieur de Soulanges, and her little bow of dismissal as she sat down by Madame de Gondreville, relaxed the muscles of his face which jealousy had made rigid. Seeing Soulanges, however, still standing quite near the sofa on which Madame de Vaudremont was seated, not apparently having understood the glance by which the lady had conveyed to him that they were both playing a ridiculous part, the volcanic Provencal again knit the black brows that overshadowed his blue eyes, smoothed his chestnut curls to keep himself in countenance, and without betraying the agitation which made his heart beat, watched the faces of the Countess and of M. de Soulanges while still chatting with his neighbors. He then took the hand of Colonel Montcornet, who had just renewed their old acquaintance, but he listened to him without hearing him; his mind was elsewhere.

Soulanges was gazing calmly at the women, sitting four ranks deep all round the immense ballroom, admiring this dado of diamonds, rubies, masses of gold and shining hair, of which the lustre almost outshone the blaze of waxlights, the cutglass of the chandeliers, and the gilding. His rival’s stolid indifference put the lawyer out of countenance. Quite incapable of controlling his secret transports of impatience, Martial went towards Madame de Vaudremont with a bow. On seeing the Provencal, Soulanges gave him a covert glance, and impertinently turned away his head. Solemn silence now reigned in the room, where curiosity was at the highest pitch. All these eager faces wore the strangest mixed expressions; every one apprehended one of those outbreaks which men of breeding carefully avoid. Suddenly the Count’s pale face turned as red as the scarlet facings of his coat, and he fixed his gaze on the floor that the cause of his agitation might not be guessed. On catching sight of the unknown lady humbly seated by the pedestal of the candelabrum, he moved away with a melancholy air, passing in front of the lawyer, and took refuge in one of the cardrooms. Martial and all the company thought that Soulanges had publicly surrendered the post, out of fear of the ridicule which invariably attaches to a discarded lover. The lawyer proudly raised his head and looked at the strange lady; then, as he took his seat at his ease near Madame de Vaudremont, he listened to her so inattentively that he did not catch these words spoken behind her fan:

“Martial, you will oblige me this evening by not wearing that ring that you snatched from me. I have my reasons, and will explain them to you in a moment when we go away. You must give me your arm to go to the Princess de Wagram’s.”

“Why did you come in with the Colonel?” asked the Baron.

“I met him in the hall,” she replied. “But leave me now; everybody is looking at us.”

Martial returned to the Colonel of Cuirassiers. Then it was that the little blue lady had become the object of the curiosity which agitated in such various ways the Colonel, Soulanges, Martial, and Madame de Vaudremont.

When the friends parted, after the challenge which closed their conversation, the Baron flew to Madame de Vaudremont, and led her to a place in the most brilliant quadrille. Favored by the sort of intoxication which dancing always produces in a woman, and by the turmoil of a ball, where men appear in all the trickery of dress, which adds no less to their attractions than it does to those of women, Martial thought he might yield with impunity to the charm that attracted his gaze to the fair stranger. Though he succeeded in hiding his first glances towards the lady in blue from the anxious activity of the Countess’ eyes, he was ere long caught in the fact; and though he managed to excuse himself once for his absence of mind, he could not justify the unseemly silence with which he presently heard the most insinuating question which a woman can put to a man:

“Do you like me very much this evening?”

And the more dreamy he became, the more the Countess pressed and teased him.

While Martial was dancing, the Colonel moved from group to group, seeking information about the unknown lady. After exhausting the good-humor even of the most indifferent, he had resolved to take advantage of a moment when the Comtesse de Gondreville seemed to be at liberty, to ask her the name of the mysterious lady, when he perceived a little space left clear between the pedestal of the candelabrum and the two sofas, which ended in that corner. The dance had left several of the chairs vacant, which formed rows of fortifications held by mothers or women of middle age; and the Colonel seized the opportunity to make his way through this palisade hung with shawls and wraps. He began by making himself agreeable to the dowagers, and so from one to another, and from compliment to compliment, he at last reached the empty space next the stranger. At the risk of catching on to the gryphons and chimaeras of the huge candelabrum, he stood there, braving the glare and dropping of the wax candles, to Martial’s extreme annoyance.

The Colonel, far too tactful to speak suddenly to the little blue lady on his right, began by saying to a plain woman who was seated on the left:

“This is a splendid ball, madame! What luxury! What life! On my word, every woman here is pretty! You are not dancing—because you do not care for it, no doubt.”

This vapid conversation was solely intended to induce his right-hand neighbor to speak; but she, silent and absent-minded, paid not the least attention. The officer had in store a number of phrases which he intended should lead up to: “And you, madame?”—a question from which he hoped great things. But he was strangely surprised to see tears in the strange lady’s eyes, which seemed wholly absorbed in gazing on Madame de Vaudremont.

“You are married, no doubt, madame?” he asked her at length, in hesitating tones.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the lady.

“And your husband is here, of course?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“And why, madame, do you remain in this spot? Is it to attract attention?”

The mournful lady smiled sadly.

“Allow me the honor, madame, of being your partner in the next quadrille, and I will take care not to bring you back here. I see a vacant settee near the fire; come and take it. When so many people are ready to ascend the throne, and Royalty is the mania of the day, I cannot imagine that you will refuse the title of Queen of the Ball which your beauty may claim.”

“I do not intend to dance, monsieur.”

The curt tone of the lady’s replies was so discouraging that the Colonel found himself compelled to raise the siege. Martial, who guessed what the officer’s last request had been, and the refusal he had met with, began to smile, and stroked his chin, making the diamond sparkle which he wore on his finger.

“What are you laughing at?” said the Comtesse de Vaudremont.

“At the failure of the poor Colonel, who has just put his foot in it—”

“I begged you to take your ring off,” said the Countess, interrupting him.

“I did not hear you.”

“If you can hear nothing this evening, at any rate you see everything, Monsieur le Baron,” said Madame de Vaudremont, with an air of vexation.

“That young man is displaying a very fine diamond,” the stranger remarked to the Colonel.

“Splendid,” he replied. “The man is the Baron Martial de la Roche-Hugon, one of my most intimate friends.”

“I have to thank you for telling me his name,” she went on; “he seems an agreeable man.”

“Yes, but he is rather fickle.”

“He seems to be on the best terms with the Comtesse de Vaudremont?” said the lady, with an inquiring look at the Colonel.

“On the very best.”

The unknown turned pale.

“Hallo!” thought the soldier, “she is in love with that lucky devil Martial.”

“I fancied that Madame de Vaudremont had long been devoted to M. de Soulanges,” said the lady, recovering a little from the suppressed grief which had clouded the fairness of her face.

“For a week past the Countess has been faithless,” replied the Colonel. “But you must have seen poor Soulanges when he came in; he is still trying to disbelieve in his disaster.”

“Yes, I saw him,” said the lady. Then she added, “Thank you very much, monsieur,” in a tone which signified a dismissal.

At this moment the quadrille was coming to an end. Montcornet had only time to withdraw, saying to himself by way of consolation, “She is married.”

“Well, valiant Cuirassier,” exclaimed the Baron, drawing the Colonel aside into a window-bay to breathe the fresh air from the garden, “how are you getting on?”

“She is a married woman, my dear fellow.”

“What does that matter?”

“Oh, deuce take it! I am a decent sort of man,” replied the Colonel. “I have no idea of paying my addresses to a woman I cannot marry. Besides, Martial, she expressly told me that she did not intend to dance.”

“Colonel, I will bet a hundred napoleons to your gray horse that she will dance with me this evening.”

“Done!” said the Colonel, putting his hand in the coxcomb’s. “Meanwhile I am going to look for Soulanges; he perhaps knows the lady, as she seems interested in him.”

“You have lost, my good fellow,” cried Martial, laughing. “My eyes have met hers, and I know what they mean. My dear friend, you owe me no grudge for dancing with her after she has refused you?”

“No, no. Those who laugh last, laugh longest. But I am an honest gambler and a generous enemy, Martial, and I warn you, she is fond of diamonds.”

With these words the friends parted; General Montcornet made his way to the cardroom, where he saw the Comte de Soulanges sitting at a bouillotte table. Though there was no friendship between the two soldiers, beyond the superficial comradeship arising from the perils of war and the duties of the service, the Colonel of Cuirassiers was painfully struck by seeing the Colonel of Artillery, whom he knew to be a prudent man, playing at a game which might bring him to ruin. The heaps of gold and notes piled on the fateful cards showed the frenzy of play. A circle of silent men stood round the players at the table. Now and then a few words were spoken—pass, play, I stop, a thousand Louis, taken—but, looking at the five motionless men, it seemed as though they talked only with their eyes. As the Colonel, alarmed by Soulanges’ pallor, went up to him, the Count was winning. Field-Marshal the Duc d’Isemberg, Keller, and a famous banker rose from the table completely cleaned out of considerable sums. Soulanges looked gloomier than ever as he swept up a quantity of gold and notes; he did not even count it; his lips curled with bitter scorn, he seemed to defy fortune rather than be grateful for her favors.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“Courage,” said the Colonel. “Courage, Soulanges!” Then, thinking to do him a service, he added: “Come with me. I have some good news for you, but on one condition.”

“What is that?” asked Soulanges.

The Comte de Soulanges rose abruptly, tucking his winnings into his handkerchief—he had been twisting it with nervousness—and his face was so savage that none of the players objected to his leaving with their money. Indeed, every face seemed to relax when his morose countenance disappeared from the circle of light at the gaming-table.

“Those fiends of soldiers are always as thick as thieves at a fair!” said a diplomat who had been watching as he took Soulanges’ place. One pallid, fatigued face turned to the newcomer and, with a glance that flashed and died like a diamond, said, “When we say military men, we do not mean civil, Monsieur le Ministre.”

“My dear fellow,” said Montcornet to Soulanges, leading him into a corner, “the Emperor spoke warmly in your praise this morning, and your promotion to be field-marshal is certain.”

“The Master does not love the Artillery.”

“No, but he adores the nobility, and you are an aristocrat. The Master said,” added Montcornet, “that those who married in Paris during the campaign were not to be considered in disgrace. Well?”

The Comte de Soulanges looked as if he understood nothing.

“And now I hope,” the Colonel went on, “that you will tell me if you know a charming little woman who is sitting under a huge candelabrum—”

At these words the Count’s face lit up; he seized the Colonel’s hand violently. “My dear General,” said he, in a changed voice, “if any man but you had asked me such a question, I would have cracked his skull with this mass of gold. Leave me, I entreat you. I feel more like blowing out my brains this evening than— I hate everything I see; in fact, I am going. This gaiety, this music, these stupid faces, all laughing, are killing me!”

“My poor friend!” replied Montcornet, giving the Count’s hand a friendly pressure, “you are too vehement. What would you say if I told you that Martial is thinking so little of Madame de Vaudremont that he is quite smitten with that little lady?”

“If he speaks to her,” cried Soulanges, stammering with rage, “I will thrash him as flat as his own portfolio, even if the coxcomb were in the Emperor’s lap!”

He sank overcome in an easy-chair to which Montcornet had led him. The colonel slowly withdrew, seeing that Soulanges was in a fury beyond consolation.

When Montcornet returned to the ballroom, Madame de Vaudremont was the first person his eyes found; her usually calm face showed ill-concealed agitation. A chair was vacant near hers, and the Colonel sat down.

“I dare wager something has vexed you?” he said.

“A mere trifle, General. I want to be gone; I promised to go to the Grand Duchess of Berg’s ball, and must look in first at the Princesse de Wagram’s. Monsieur de la Roche-Hugon, who knows this, amuses himself by flirting with the dowagers.”

“That is not the whole secret of your disturbance, and I will bet a hundred louis that you will remain here the whole evening.”

“Impertinent man!”

“Then I have hit the truth?”

“Well, tell me, what am I thinking of?” said the Countess, tapping the Colonel’s fingers with her fan. “I might even reward you if you guess rightly.”

“I will not accept the challenge; I have too much the advantage of you.”

“You are presumptuous.”

“You are afraid of seeing Martial at the feet—”

“Of whom?” cried the Countess, affecting surprise.

“Of that candelabrum,” replied the Colonel, glancing at the fair stranger, then looking at the Countess.

“You have guessed it,” replied the coquette, hiding her face behind her fan. “Old Madame de Lansac, who is, you know, as malicious as an old monkey,” she went on after a pause, “has just told me that Monsieur de la Roche-Hugon is running into danger by flirting with that stranger, who sits here this evening like a skeleton at a feast. I would rather see a death’s head than that face, so cruelly beautiful, and as pale as a ghost. She is my evil genius. Madame de Lansac,” she added with a flash and gesture of annoyance, “who only goes to a ball to watch everything while pretending to sleep, has made me miserably anxious. Martial shall pay dearly for playing me such a trick. Urge him, meanwhile, since he is your friend, not to make me so unhappy.”

“I have just been with a man who promises to blow his brains out, and nothing less, if he speaks to that little lady. And he is a man, madame, to keep his word. But then I know Martial; such threats are to him an encouragement. And, besides, we have wagered—” Here the Colonel lowered his voice.

“Can it be true?” said the Countess.

“On my word of honor.”

“Thank you, my dear Colonel,” replied Madame de Vaudremont, with a glance full of invitation.

“Will you do me the honor of dancing with me?”

“Yes; but the next quadrille. During this one I want to see what will come of this little intrigue, and to ascertain who the blue lady may be; she looks intelligent.”

The Colonel, understanding the Countess wished to be alone, retired, satisfied to have begun his attack well.

At entertainments like this, women such as Madame de Lansac gather to watch younger mariners struggle with the tempest. Madame de Lansac, interested in these personages, could easily read the Countess’s agitation. Though the lady might fan herself gracefully and smile on young men, the Dowager—one of the most clear-sighted, mischief-loving survivors of the eighteenth century—read her heart through the mask. The old woman detected the slightest movements that revealed impressions—the faint quiver of the cheeks, the curve of the eyebrows, the least curl of the lips—these were to the Duchess like the print of a book. From her large arm-chair, filled by her dress, the coquette of the past, while talking to a diplomat who had sought her anecdotes, admired in the younger woman how bravely she disguised annoyance and sorrow. Madame de Vaudremont felt as much sorrow as she feigned cheerfulness; she had believed Martial a man whose talents would adorn her life with power, and now perceived her mistake, dangerous to her reputation and pride. In her, as in other women of that time, the suddenness of passion increased her vehemence. Souls that love much and often suffer no less than those consumed by one affection. Her liking for Martial, though of yesterday, still wounded deeply: the pain of losing a living hope is acute.

The old Duchess, watching for an opportunity to speak to the Countess, hastened to dismiss her Ambassador; in comparison with a lover’s quarrel, every other interest paled, even to an old woman. To engage battle, Madame de Lansac shot the younger lady a sardonic glance which made the Countess fear her fate lay in the dowager’s hands. There are looks between woman and woman like torches at a climax; no one who had not known that Duchess could appreciate the terror her expression inspired.

Madame de Lansac was tall; her features suggested “That must have been a handsome woman!” She powdered and rouged to hide wrinkles; her eyes looked dim beside the carmine. She wore many diamonds and dressed with enough taste to avoid ridicule. Her sharp nose promised epigram, a well-fitted set of teeth preserved a smile of irony recalling Voltaire; yet the exquisite politeness of her manners softened the mischief in her mind, making it impossible to call her malicious.

Her eyes lit up, and a triumphant glance, seconded by a smile that said, “I promised you as much!” shot across the room, bringing a blush of hope to the pale cheeks of the young stranger under the chandelier. The alliance between Madame de Lansac and the stranger did not escape the Comtesse de Vaudremont, who scented a mystery and was determined to penetrate it.

At this instant the Baron de la Roche-Hugon, after questioning all the dowagers unsuccessfully about the blue lady’s name, turned in despair to the Comtesse de Gondreville, who only replied, “A lady whom the ‘ancient’ Duchesse de Lansac introduced to me.”

Chance turned his glance to the armchair occupied by the old lady; he intercepted the look of intelligence she sent the stranger; though they had been on bad terms, he decided to speak.

“If the old witch affects to be friendly,” thought the Baron, “she is certainly going to play me some trick.—Madame,” he said, “you have, I am told, undertaken the charge of a very precious treasure.”

“Do you take me for a dragon?” said the old lady. “But of whom are you speaking?” she added with a sweetness that revived Martial’s hopes.

“Of that little lady, unknown to all, whom the jealousy of these coquettes has imprisoned in that corner. You, no doubt, know her family?”

“Yes,” said the Duchess. “But what concern have you with a provincial heiress, married some time since, a woman of good birth, whom you none of you know? She goes nowhere.”

“Why does she not dance? She is such a pretty creature! May we conclude a treaty of peace? If you will tell me what I want to know, I promise you that a petition for the restitution of the woods of Navarreins by the Commissioners of Crown Lands shall be strongly urged on the Emperor.”

The Baron’s suggestion was a trick: he proposed to petition for an estate belonging to an elder branch of the Navarreins under false pretense. The Duchess replied soothingly.

“Monsieur,” she said with deceptive gravity, “bring the Comtesse de Vaudremont across to me. I promise you I will reveal to her the mystery of the interesting unknown. You see, every man in the room is as curious as you. All eyes are turned toward the corner where my protegee has so modestly placed herself; she is reaping all the homage the women wished to deprive her of. Happy the man she chooses for her partner!” She fixed her eyes on Madame de Vaudremont with one of those looks saying plainly, “We are talking of you.” Then she added, “I imagine you would rather learn the stranger’s name from your handsome Countess than from mine.”

There was such marked defiance in the Duchess’ attitude that Madame de Vaudremont rose, took the chair Martial placed for her, and, without noticing him, said, “I can guess, madame, that you are talking of me; but I admit my want of perspicacity; I do not know whether it is for good or evil.”

Madame de Lansac pressed the young woman’s pretty hand in her dry, wrinkled fingers and answered in a low, compassionate tone, “Poor child!”

The women looked at each other. Madame de Vaudremont understood Martial was in the way and dismissed him with an imperious, “Leave us.”

The Baron, ill-pleased at seeing the Countess under the spell of the dangerous sibyl who had drawn her to her side, gave one of those looks a man can give—potent over a blinded heart, but ridiculous in the eyes of a woman beginning to criticise him.

“Do you think you can play the Emperor?” said Madame de Vaudremont, turning three-quarters of her face to fix an ironical sidelong gaze on the lawyer.

Martial, a man of the world with wit and acumen, would not risk breaking with a woman favored at Court and whom the Emperor wished to see married. He also counted on provoking her jealousy as the surest means of discovering the secret of her coolness, and withdrew willingly when a new quadrille put everyone in motion.

Making room for dancers, the Baron leaned against a marble console, folded his arms, and watched the two ladies. He followed the glances they directed to the stranger. Comparing the Countess with the new beauty, made alluring by mystery, he fell prey to the detestable self-interest of adventurous lady-killers; he hesitated between a fortune within his grasp and the indulgence of his caprice. The blaze of light gave strong relief to his anxious face against the white silk hangings, so that he might have seemed an evil genius. Even from a distance some observers could say, “There is another poor wretch who seems to be enjoying himself!”

The Colonel, meanwhile, shoulder against the doorway post between ballroom and cardroom, could laugh undetected under his ample moustache; it amused him to watch the dance—pretty heads turning in obedience to the figures; he read in faces, like those of the Countess and Martial, the secrets of their agitation; and then, seeing the gloomy looks of the Comte de Soulanges, still seated on the sofa, and the plaintive expression of the fair unknown, on whose features hopes and involuntary dread alternated, he felt like king of the feast. In this moving picture he saw a presentment of the world, and he laughed as he found himself the object of inviting smiles from many beautiful women. A Colonel of the Imperial Guard, equal to a Brigadier-General, was one of the best matches in the army.

It was nearly midnight. Conversation, gambling, dancing, flirtations, petty rivalries, and scheming had reached that pitch of ardor that makes a young man exclaim, “A fine ball!”

“My sweet little angel,” said Madame de Lansac to the Countess, “you are now at an age when in my day I made many mistakes. Seeing you endure a thousand deaths just now, it occurred to me I might give you some charitable advice. To go wrong at two-and-twenty means spoiling your future; is it not tearing the gown you must wear? My dear, it is not much later that we learn to wear it without crumpling it. Go on making clever enemies and friends without conduct, and you will see what a pleasant life you will some day lead!”

“Oh, madame, it is very hard for a woman to be happy, do not you think?” the Countess eagerly exclaimed.

“My child, at your age you must choose between pleasure and happiness. You want to marry Martial, who is not foolish enough to make a good husband, nor passionate enough to remain a lover. He is in debt, my dear; he is the man to run through your fortune; still, that would be nothing if he could make you happy. Do not you see how aged he looks? He must have been ill; he is making the most of what is left him. In three years he will be a wreck. He will be ambitious; perhaps he may succeed. I do not think so. What is he? A man of intrigue, who may have business skill and gossip agreeably; but he is too presumptuous for any sterling merit; he will not go far. Besides—only look at him. Is it not written on his brow that, at this very moment, what he sees in you is not a young and pretty woman, but the two million francs you possess? He does not love you, my dear; he is reckoning you as if you were an investment. If you are bent on marrying, find an older man with an assured position halfway on his career. A widow’s marriage ought not to be a trivial love affair. Is a mouse to be caught a second time in the same trap? A new alliance ought now to be a good speculation on your part, and in marrying again you ought at least to have a hope of being some day addressed as Madame la Maréchale!”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
As she spoke, both women fixed their eyes on Colonel Montcornet’s handsome face.

“If you prefer to play the delicate flirt and not marry again,” the Duchess said bluntly, “my poor child, you will know how to raise storms and disperse them. But, I beg you, never make it your pleasure to disturb families, destroy unions, and ruin wives' happiness. I have played that perilous game. For a triumph of vanity some poor virtuous soul is murdered—for there really are virtuous women—and we may make ourselves mortally hated. I learned, a little too late, that, as the Duc d’Albe said, one salmon is worth a thousand frogs! Genuine affection brings far more happiness than the transient passions we inspire. I came to preach to you; you are the cause of my visit in this house, which stinks of the lower class. Have I just seen actors here? We used to receive them in our boudoir, but never in the drawing-room! Why such astonishment? Listen. If you want to play with men, wring the hearts only of those whose lives are not settled and who have no duties; the others never forgive us for errors that cost them happiness. Learn from my experience. That unlucky Soulanges, whose head you've turned these past fifteen months—do you know whom you struck?—his whole life. He has been married two years; worshiped by a charming wife he loves but neglects; she lives in tears. Soulanges has had remorse more terrible than his pleasures were sweet. And you, artful little thing, have deserted him. Come and see your work.”

The old lady took Madame de Vaudremont’s hand, and they rose.

“There,” said Madame de Lansac, indicating the stranger sitting pale under the candlelight, “that is my grandniece, the Comtesse de Soulanges; today she yielded to my persuasion and consented to leave the sorrowful room where the sight of her child gives little consolation. You see her? You think her charming? Then imagine, dear Beauty, what she must have been when happiness and love shed their glory on that face now blighted.”

The Countess looked away, absorbed in sad reflection.

The Duchess led her to the card-room door; after looking round as if searching—“And there is Soulanges!” she said.

The Countess shuddered as she saw, in the dimmest corner, the pale, set face of Soulanges in an easy-chair. His indifferent posture and rigid brow betrayed suffering. Players passed him as if he were dead. The picture of a weeping wife and a dejected husband, separated amid festivity like two halves of a lightning-blasted tree, perhaps held prophetic significance for the Countess. She feared an image of future revenge. Her heart was not yet so dried up; she pressed the Duchess’s hand and thanked her with a childlike smile.

“My dear child,” the old lady whispered, “remember henceforth that we are just as capable of repelling a man’s attentions as of attracting them.”

“She is yours if you are not a simpleton.” Madame de Lansac whispered this into Colonel Montcornet’s ear while the Countess was still moved by Soulanges, for she still loved him enough to wish to restore him to happiness and resolved to exert her charms to bring him back to his wife.

“Oh! I will talk to him!” she told Madame de Lansac.

“Do nothing of the kind, my dear!” cried the old lady as she returned to her armchair. “Choose a good husband and shut your door to my nephew. A wife cannot accept her husband’s heart as another woman's gift; she is a hundred times happier believing she reconquered it. By bringing my niece here I have given her an excellent chance of regaining her husband's affection. All I need is for you to play the Colonel.” She pointed to the Baron’s friend, and the Countess smiled.

“Well, madame, do you at last know the name of the unknown?” Martial asked the Countess with pique when he saw her alone.

“Yes,” said Madame de Vaudremont, looking him in the face.

Her features showed roguery and fun. Her smile and bright eyes were like a will-o’-the-wisp. Martial, believing she still loved him, assumed the coquetting graces a man uses before the woman he loves. With a fatuous air he said:

“And will you be annoyed if I seem to attach great importance to your telling me that name?”

“Will you be annoyed,” she answered, “if a remnant of affection prevents my telling you and if I forbid you from making the smallest advances to that young lady? It might cost you your life.”

“To lose your good graces, madame, would be worse than to lose my life.”

“Martial,” said the Countess severely, “she is Madame de Soulanges. Her husband would blow your brains out—if, indeed, you have any—”

“Ha! ha!” laughed the coxcomb. “What! the Colonel can leave in peace the man who robbed him of your love, and then would fight for his wife! What a subversion of principles! I beg you to allow me to dance with the little lady. You will then see how little love that heart of ice could feel for you; for, if the Colonel disapproves of my dancing with his wife after allowing me to—”

“But she loves her husband.”

“A still further obstacle that I shall have the pleasure of conquering.”

“But she is married.”

“A whimsical objection!”

“Ah!” said the Countess with a bitter smile, “you punish us alike for our faults and our repentance!”

“Do not be angry!” exclaimed Martial eagerly. “Oh, forgive me, I beseech you. There, I will think no more of Madame de Soulanges.”

“You deserve that I should send you to her.”

“I am off,” said the Baron, laughing, “and I shall return more devoted to you. You will see the prettiest woman cannot capture the heart that is yours.”

“That is to say, that you want to win Colonel Montcornet’s horse?”

“Ah! Traitor!” he cried, threatening his friend with his finger. The Colonel smiled and joined them; the Baron gave him the seat near the Countess, saying with sardonic accent: “Here, madame, is a man who boasted that he could win your good graces in one evening.”

He went away, thinking himself clever to have piqued the Countess’s pride and to have done Montcornet an ill turn; but he had not seen the irony: Madame de Vaudremont had come as far to meet his friend as he had to meet her, though both were unconscious.

At that moment, as the lawyer fluttered to the candelabrum where Madame de Soulanges sat, pale and timid and alive only in her eyes, her husband came to the ballroom door, his eyes flashing with anger. The old Duchess, watchful, flew to her nephew, begged him to give her his arm and find her carriage, affecting mortal boredom to prevent an outbreak. Before going she shot a glance of intelligence at her niece, indicating the enterprising knight about to address her; the signal seemed to say, “There he is, avenge yourself!”

Madame de Vaudremont caught these looks; a sudden light dawned; she feared she was the dupe of the cunning, practiced old woman.

“That perfidious Duchess,” she thought, “has perhaps amused herself by preaching morality to me while playing me some spiteful trick of her own.”

At this thought Madame de Vaudremont’s pride was roused more than curiosity to untangle the intrigue. Absorbed, she was no longer mistress of herself. The Colonel, interpreting her embarrassment to his advantage, grew more ardent and pressing. The old, blasé diplomates, amused by the play of faces, had never seen so many intrigues at once. The passions agitating the two couples showed variations at every step in the crowded rooms and reflected in other countenances. The spectacle of so many vivid passions—lovers’ quarrels, pleasing revenges, cruel favors, flaming glances—made the onlookers feel their impotence more keenly.

At last the Baron found a seat by Madame de Soulanges. His eyes stole a long look at her neck, fresh as dew and fragrant as field flowers. He admired up close the beauty that had amazed him from afar. He could see a small, well-shod foot and a slender, graceful shape. Women now wore their sash tied close under the bosom in imitation of Greek statues—a pitiless fashion for flawed busts. As he cast furtive glances, Martial was enchanted with her perfection.

“You have not danced once this evening, madame,” he said in soft flattering tones. “Not, I should suppose, for lack of a partner?”

“I never go to parties; I am quite unknown,” replied Madame de Soulanges coldly, not having understood her aunt’s hint that she should attract the Baron.

Martial twisted the diamond on his left hand to give himself countenance; its flashes seemed to stir something in the Countess’s mind; she blushed and looked at him with an undefinable expression.

“Do you like dancing?” asked the Provençal to reopen the conversation.

“Yes, very much, monsieur.”

At this reply their eyes met. The young man, surprised by her earnest accent that aroused a vague hope, questioned her with a looking-glass of courtesy and bashful speech.

“Then, madame, am I not overbold in offering myself to be your partner for the next quadrille?”

Artless confusion colored the Countess’s white cheeks.

“But, monsieur, I have already refused one partner—a military man—”

“Was it that tall cavalry colonel whom you see over there?”

“Precisely so.”

“Oh! he is a friend of mine; feel no alarm. Will you grant me the favor I dare hope for?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

Her tone betrayed emotion so new and deep the lawyer’s world-worn soul was touched. Overcome by schoolboy shyness, he lost confidence; his southern brain caught fire and his phrases seemed graceless beside her bright, subtle replies. Fortunately the quadrille was forming. Standing by his beautiful partner, he felt more at ease. For many men, dancing is a phase of being; they think they can influence a woman's heart more by bodily grace than intellect. Martial now wished to display his most effective seductions, judging by the pretentiousness of his movements.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
He led his conquest to the quadrille where the room’s most brilliant women danced. As the orchestra began the first figure, the Baron felt immense gratification surveying the ladies in that formidable square and noting that Madame de Soulanges’ dress might rival Madame de Vaudremont’s, who by chance stood vis-à-vis him and the lady in blue. For a moment all eyes turned to Madame de Soulanges; a flattering murmur showed she was the subject of every man’s comment. Modestly abashed, she looked down, blushed, and grew the more charming; when she raised her eyes she looked at her ravished partner as if to transfer that glory to him, showing she cared more for his praise than for the rest. Though modest and new to the ballroom, she knew—like an accomplished coquette—how to lift her eyes at the right moment and drop them with assumed bashfulness.

When the new figure, invented by Trenis, brought Martial face to face with the Colonel, the latter laughed, “I have won your horse.”

“Yes, but you have lost eighty thousand francs a year!” retorted Montcornet, glancing at Madame de Vaudremont.

“What do I care?” replied Martial. “Madame de Soulanges is worth millions!”

At the end of the quadrille whispers circulated. Less pretty women made moral remarks to their partners about the budding liaison between Martial and the Comtesse; the handsomest women wondered at her easy surrender. The men could not understand such luck as the Baron’s, not finding him particularly fascinating. A few indulgent women advised patience—young wives would be in a hapless plight if an expressive look or a few graceful steps could compromise a woman.

Martial alone knew the extent of his happiness. During the last figure, forming the moulinet, his fingers clasped the Countess’s, and he fancied her grip through the thin perfumed kid answered his amorous appeal.

“Madame,” he said as the dance ended, “do not go back to that odious corner where you have been burying your face and dress until now. Is admiration the only benefit you can get from the jewels that adorn your white neck and coiffure? Come and take a turn through the rooms to enjoy the scene and yourself.”

Madame de Soulanges yielded to her seducer, who thought she would be his more surely if he could show her off. Side by side they walked two or three times among the crowded salons. The Comtesse, evidently uneasy, paused at each door before entering, only going in after stretching her neck to look at all the men there. This alarm, which crowned the Baron’s satisfaction, did not seem to leave her until he said, “Make yourself easy; he is not here.”

They reached an immense picture gallery in a wing of the mansion, where a collation awaited. As supper was about to begin, Martial led the Countess to an oval boudoir looking onto the garden, where rare flowers and a few shrubs made a scented bower under sky-blue hangings. The murmurs of the festivity died away. The Countess, at first startled, refused firmly to follow him; but glancing in a mirror and assuring herself they could be seen, she sat on an ottoman with tolerable grace.

“This room is charming,” she said, admiring the pearl-looped hangings.

“All here is love and delight!” said the Baron, with deep emotion.

In the mysterious light he saw on her agitated face uneasiness, modesty, and eagerness that enchanted him. The young lady smiled, and the smile seemed to end the struggle within her; insinuatingly she took his left hand and drew from his finger the ring on which she had fixed her eyes.

“What a fine diamond!” she exclaimed, in the artless tone of a girl betraying the incitement of a first temptation.

Martial, troubled by her involuntary, intoxicating touch as she drew off the ring, looked at her with eyes as glittering as the gem.

“Wear it,” he said, “in memory of this hour, and for the love of—”

She looked at him with such rapture that he did not finish; he kissed her hand.

“You give it me?” she said, astonished.

“I wish I had the whole world to offer you!”

“You are not joking?” she asked, her voice husky with satisfaction.

“Will you accept only my diamond?”

“You will never take it back?”

“Never.”

She put the ring on her finger. Martial, confident of coming happiness, was about to put his arm about her waist when she suddenly rose and said, in a clear voice without agitation: “I accept the diamond, monsieur, the less scruple because it belongs to me.”

The Baron was speechless.

“Monsieur de Soulanges took it lately from my dressing-table, and told me he had lost it,” she went on.

“You are mistaken, madame,” said Martial, nettled. “It was given me by Madame de Vaudremont.”

“Precisely so,” she said with a smile. “My husband borrowed this ring of me, he gave it to her, she made it a present to you; my ring has made a little journey, that is all. This ring will perhaps tell me all I do not know, and teach me the secret of always pleasing. Monsieur,” she added, “if it had not been my own, you may be sure I should not have risked paying so dearly for it; for a young woman, it is said, is in danger with you. But, you see,” and she touched a spring within the ring, “here is M. de Soulanges’ hair.”

She fled into the crowded rooms so swiftly it seemed useless to follow; Martial, utterly confounded, had no mind to press the adventure further. The Countess’ laugh found an echo in the boudoir, where he now perceived, between two shrubs, the Colonel and Madame de Vaudremont, both laughing heartily.

“Will you have my horse, to ride after your prize?” said the Colonel.

The Baron met the banter poured upon him by Madame de Vaudremont and Montcornet with good grace, which secured their silence as to the evening’s events, when his friend exchanged his charger for a rich and pretty young wife.

As the Comtesse de Soulanges drove across Paris from the Chaussée d’Antin to the Faubourg Saint-Germain, her soul was prey to many alarms. Before leaving the Hotel Gondreville she had passed through the rooms but found neither her aunt nor her husband, who had gone away without her. Terrible suspicions then tortured her ingenuous mind. Having silently witnessed her husband’s torments since Madame de Vaudremont had chained him to her car, she had hoped repentance would restore him. It was with unspeakable repugnance that she had consented to the scheme plotted by her aunt, Madame de Lansac, and in that moment she feared she had made a mistake.

The evening’s experience had saddened her innocent soul. Alarmed at first by the Count’s look of suffering and dejection, she became more so on seeing her rival’s beauty, and the corruption of society gripped her heart. As she crossed the Pont Royal she threw away the desecrated hair at the back of the diamond that had once been a token of pure affection. She wept remembering her long grief, and shuddered at the thought that a woman who wishes for peace must bury such sufferings deep within without complaint.

“Alas!” she thought, “what can women do when they do not love? What is the fount of their indulgence? I cannot believe that, as my aunt tells me, reason is all-sufficient to maintain them in such devotion.”

She was still sighing when her man-servant let down the handsome carriage-step; she flew into the hall of her house, rushed upstairs, and was startled to see her husband sitting by the fire.

“How long is it, my dear, since you have gone to balls without telling me beforehand?” he asked in a broken voice. “You must know that a woman is always out of place without her husband. You compromised yourself strangely by remaining in the dark corner where you had ensconced yourself.”

“Oh, my dear, good Leon,” she said coaxingly, “I could not resist the happiness of seeing you without your seeing me. My aunt took me to this ball, and I was very happy there!”

This speech disarmed his assumed severity; he had been blaming himself while dreading her return, fearing she knew of an infidelity he had hoped to hide. As is the way of guilty lovers, he tried, by faultfinding, to escape her anger. Happy to see him smile and find him in a room he had lately shunned, the Countess looked so tenderly that she blushed and cast down her eyes. Her clemency enraptured Soulanges; he seized and kissed her hand gratefully—gratitude being often part of love.

“Hortense, what is that on your finger that has hurt my lip so much?” he asked, laughing.

“It is my diamond which you said you had lost, and which I have found.”

General Montcornet did not marry Madame de Vaudremont, despite their brief understanding; she was among the victims of the terrible fire that gave fame to the ball given by the Austrian ambassador on the occasion of Napoleon’s marriage to the daughter of Emperor Joseph II.

JULY, 1829.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

- Bonaparte, Napoleon — The Vendetta; The Gondreville Mystery; Colonel Chabert; The Seamy Side of History; A Woman of Thirty
- Gondreville, Malin, Comte de — The Gondreville Mystery; A Start in Life; The Member for Arcis
- Keller, Francois — Cesar Birotteau; Eugenie Grandet; The Government Clerks; The Member for Arcis
- Keller, Madame Francois — The Member for Arcis; The Thirteen
- La Roche-Hugon, Martial de — The Peasantry; A Daughter of Eve; The Member for Arcis; The Middle Classes; Cousin Betty
- Montcornet, Marechal, Comte de — Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Peasantry; A Man of Business; Cousin Betty
- Murat, Joachim, Prince — The Vendetta; The Gondreville Mystery; Colonel Chabert; The Country Doctor
- Soulanges, Comte Leon de — The Peasantry
- Soulanges, Comtesse Hortense de — The Thirteen; The Peasantry
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################