In 1828, about one o’clock in the morning, two friends left a large house in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré near the Élysée-Bourbon. One was the well-known doctor Horace Bianchon; the other, the elegant Baron Eugène de Rastignac. Each had dismissed his carriage; no cab was available; the night was fine and the pavement dry.

“We will walk as far as the boulevard,” said Rastignac. “You can get a hackney at the club; there’s always one until daybreak. Come as far as my house.”

“With pleasure.”

“Well, and what have you to say about it?”

“About that woman?” Bianchon answered coldly.

“There I recognize my Bianchon!” said Rastignac. “How?”

“You speak of the Marquise d’Espard as if she were a case for your hospital.”

“Do you want to know what I think, Eugène? If you throw Madame de Nucingen over for this Marquise, you will swap a one-eyed horse for a blind one.”

“Madame de Nucingen is thirty-six, Bianchon.”

“And this woman is thirty-three,” said Bianchon quickly.

“Her worst enemies only say twenty-six.”

“When you want to know a woman’s age, look at her temples and the tip of her nose. Cosmetics change much, but not those witnesses of experience. When temples are flaccid and the nose shows minute specks, she’s past thirty. She may be handsome, witty, loving—but she is mature. I don’t blame men who attach themselves to such women; only, a man of your distinction must not mistake a winter pippin for a little summer apple. Love never studies registers; no one loves a woman because she is handsome or ugly; we love because we love.”

“For my part, I love for other reasons. She is Marquise d’Espard; she was a Blamont-Chauvry; she is the fashion; she has soul; her foot is pretty; she has perhaps a hundred thousand francs a year—some day I may marry her! In short, she will put me into a position to pay my debts.”

“I thought you were rich,” interrupted Bianchon.

“Bah! I have twenty thousand francs a year—just enough to keep up my stables. I was thoroughly done in that Nucingen business. I have got my sisters married; that’s the clearest profit since we last met; and I would rather have them provided for than five hundred thousand francs a year. I am ambitious. To what can Madame de Nucingen lead? A year more and I shall be shelved, stuck like a married man. I have all the discomforts of marriage and of single life without the advantages of either.”

“So you think there’s treasure here?” said Bianchon. “Your Marquise does not hit my fancy.”

“Your liberal opinions blur your eyesight. If Madame d’Espard were a Madame Rabourdin...”

“Listen. Noble or simple, she would still have no soul; she is a perfect type of selfishness. Take my word for it: medical men judge people as well as bodies; the sharpest of us read the soul while we study the body. Despite that pretty boudoir and the magnificence of this house, it’s quite possible Madame la Marquise is in debt.”

“What makes you think so?”

“I do not assert it; I suppose. She talked of her soul as Louis XVIII talked of his heart. That fragile fair woman, who pities herself to be pitied, has an iron constitution, a wolf’s appetite, and the strength and cowardice of a tiger. Gauze, silk, and muslin were never more cleverly twisted round a lie!”

“Bianchon, you frighten me! You have learned a good many things since the Maison Vauquer.”

“Yes, my boy. I have seen puppets—both dolls and manikins. In high society I have seen monsters dressed in satin, Michonneaus in white gloves, Poirets with orders, fine gentlemen doing more usurious business than old Gobseck. When I wished to find Virtue, I found her shivering in a loft, half-starving on fifteen hundred francs a year, regarded as eccentric.”

“In short, the Marquise is a woman of fashion, and I abhor that kind. Why? A woman with lofty soul and gentle wit who lives simply has no chance of being the fashion. A woman of fashion gains fleeting power through hideous vices; she belies her nature and must have iron strength under a frail appearance.

“As a physician, I know a sound stomach excludes a good heart. Your woman of fashion feels little; her rage for pleasure springs from a craving to heat a cold nature, a longing for excitement. She has more brain than heart, sacrificing genuine passion and true friends to her triumphs, as a general sacrifices devoted subalterns to win a battle. The woman of fashion ceases to be womanly; she is, medically speaking, sex in the brain. Your Marquise has all the characteristics of this monstrosity: beak of a bird of prey, clear cold eye, gentle voice—polished as steel, touching everything except the heart.”

“There is some truth,” Rastignac admitted.

“Some truth?” cried Bianchon. “It is all true. Did you not see the insulting politeness that marked the distance her noble birth set between us? That cat-like civility aimed at an object. A year hence she will not write me a word to help me; this evening she pelted me with smiles thinking I could influence my uncle Popinot, on whom the success of her case depends.”

“Would you rather she had played the fool with you? I accept your diatribe against women of fashion; but you are wrong for my case. I should prefer a Marquise d’Espard to the most devout creature. Marry an angel and bury your happiness in the country. The wife of a politician is a governing machine; she makes compliments and courtesies; she’s the most important tool an ambitious man can use. A woman of the world leads to everything; she is the diamond with which a man cuts every window when he lacks the golden key.

“Do you imagine the love of a Duchesse de Langeais or de Maufrigneuse gives no pleasure? The cold, severe tone of such a woman makes the smallest evidence of affection precious. A smile from under a fan contradicts reserve and is worth all the unbridled tenderness of middle-class women. Devotion is nearly akin to speculation. A woman of fashion, a Blamont-Chauvry, has virtues: fortunes, power, effect, a contempt for what’s beneath her—”

“Thank you!” said Bianchon.

“Old curmudgeon!” laughed Rastignac. “Come—do not be so common; be like Desplein; be a Baron, a Knight of Saint-Michel; become a peer and marry your daughters to dukes.”

“I! May the five hundred thousand devils—”

“Come, can you be superior only in medicine? You distress me...”

“I hate that sort of people; I long for a revolution to deliver us from them.”

“And so, my dear Robespierre of the lancet, you will not go tomorrow to your uncle Popinot?”

“Yes, I will,” said Bianchon; “for you I would go to hell to fetch water.”

“My good friend, you touch me. I have sworn that a commission shall sit on the Marquis. Why, here is even a long-saved tear to thank you.”

“I do not promise to succeed as you wish with Jean-Jules Popinot. You do not know him. However, I will take him to see your Marquise the day after tomorrow; she may gain his favor if she can. I doubt it. If all the truffles, all the Duchesses, all the charmers in Paris were in full bloom, if the King promised him the Prairie, and the Almighty gave him the Order of Paradise with the revenues of Purgatory, not one of all these powers would induce him to transfer a single straw from one saucer of his scales to the other. He is a judge, as Death is Death.”

They reached the Minister for Foreign Affairs at the corner of the Boulevard des Capucines.

“Here you are at home,” Bianchon laughed, pointing to the ministerial residence. “And here is my carriage,” he added, calling a hackney cab. “And these—express our fortune.”

“You will be happy at the bottom of the sea, while I am still struggling with tempests on the surface till I sink and ask you for a corner in your grotto!”

“Till Saturday,” replied Bianchon.

“Agreed,” said Rastignac. “And you promise me Popinot?”

“I will do all my conscience will allow. Perhaps this appeal for a commission covers some little drama.”

“Poor Bianchon! he will never be anything but a good fellow,” Rastignac thought as the cab drove off.

Bianchon rose next morning with the delicate commission in mind. He had never asked a favor of his uncle in Court and had paid a thousand visits gratis for him. He thought Popinot would say Yes or No simply enough.

At seven Bianchon walked to the Rue du Fouarre, where Monsieur Jean-Jules Popinot, judge of the Lower Court of the Department of the Seine, lived. The Rue du Fouarre—once the seat of the medieval University—had become a poor, dirty street of the twelfth arrondissement, haunted by beggars, rag-pickers, and the needy.

Halfway down the damp street stood an old house, restored perhaps under Francis I, built of bricks with a sagging façade. Its piers and worn corner-stones gave a sense of chill; the low doorway formed a vault like a barbican. To the right of the entrance were three windows with iron gratings; to the left two similar windows gave on the porter’s cramped room, where husband, wife, and children crowded in a space falling into decay—cooking, working, and screaming in a place showing the slow raising of Paris soil.

Inside, a small square garden of not more than four long steps in each direction lay neglected: black soil, trellises without vines, papers, rags, and potsherds. Two parts of the house at right angles drew light from this curtained court, shut in by adjoining decrepit houses with wooden piers. On each floor signs of lodgers’ crafts appeared: skeins of worsted hung to dry, clean shirts on ropes, a shelf with books, women singing, carpenters sawing, copper-turners at work. The general passage consisted of wooden pillars on stone blocks forming arches. Two archways opened to the garden; two others led to a wooden staircase with an iron balustrade, its worn steps creaking. Each flat’s entrance showed an architrave dark with grime; outer doors were covered with Utrecht velvet set with brass nails—vestiges of past splendor suggesting that in Louis XIV’s time the house had housed a councillor of Parlement or a rich official.

M. Jean-Jules Popinot lived on the first floor, where gloom was increased by the street’s narrowness. This tenement was known throughout the twelfth arrondissement for the beneficent judge who administered justice there. A sketch of the man the Marquise d’Espard hoped to fascinate follows.

Popinot, as became a magistrate, was always dressed in black—a style that made him ridiculous when combined with slovenliness. Men who insist on black’s dignity must keep themselves immaculate; Popinot did not. His trousers were threadbare, showing creases from habit; his worsted stockings ill-shaped in shabby shoes; his linen stained by long storage; his coat and waistcoat matched the rest. On the first day he put on a new coat he promptly stained it. He waited for his housekeeper to tell him his hat was too shabby before buying a new one. His necktie was crumpled; he shunned gloves; his hands were usually stuffed in empty pockets; his pocket-holes were soiled and often torn. In short, he looked the sloven.

In the Palais de Justice, where black attire prevails, one can imagine Popinot. The habit of sitting for days in small, airless courts puckers a magistrate’s face; his complexion turns pallid. The most blooming young man becomes a machine applying the Code. Popinot’s body was graceless—thick knees, large feet, broad hands—contrasting with a priest-like face vaguely like a calf’s head: meek, unmeaning, with pale eyes, a straight flat nose, a flat forehead, enormous flabby ears. Thin, weak hair showed baldness. Yet one feature commended him: his mouth. His lips—full, red, finely wrinkled, mobile—expressed kindness and a sweetness that revealed noble feelings, intelligence, lucidity, and a heavenly temper. Judging by that mouth one would suspect the man’s better nature despite the sloping forehead and shambling gait.

His life matched this face: humble labor hiding a saintly virtue. His knowledge of law recommended him when Napoleon reorganized the code; by Cambacérès’ advice he was named to the Imperial High Court of Justice at Paris. Popinot was no schemer. When appointments were asked for, Ministers overlooked him; he never set foot in the Chancellor’s house. From the High Court he was sent down to the Common Court, pushed to the lowest rung by more active men; he became a supernumerary judge. Lawyers cried “Popinot a supernumerary!” at the injustice, but he made no complaint. After the clamor, he remained placid; he would probably die a puisne judge of the Court of the Seine.

To account for such obscure fortunes we must see how the legal machine assigns roles. Popinot was classed by three Presidents as the stuff of routine judges. Magistrates distinguish law and equity—law as principles applied to facts; equity as the moral truth that grows from facts. A judge’s duty is to adapt facts to fixed principles. France has about six thousand judges; not every one can be great. Popinot was a clever cadi: by mind and habit he learned to see the error of rash decisions. By judicial second-sight he could pierce the double casing of lies in which advocates hide a trial’s heart. He probed consciences as Desplein probed bodies; he sifted cases as Cuvier sifted earth, proceeding by deductions till he reconstructed a conscience’s past as Cuvier reconstructed fossilized forms. A gleam of truth would wake him at night. Struck by the injustice that favors rogues, he often preferred equity over mere letter-of-law decisions; hence his colleagues called him impractical. His brief deductions lengthened deliberations; when he perceived their dislike he gave opinions briefly. Though not fitted for pomp, his discrimination, lucidity, and penetration made him apt for laborious duties, notably as an examining judge.

Although qualified for difficult functions and known in criminal law, Popinot’s kindness constantly tortured him; he was pinched between conscience and pity. Examining judge duties are better paid than civil judges’ but onerous. Popinot, modest, virtuous, without ambition, an indefatigable worker, sacrificed his tastes to the public good and allowed himself to be sent to the noisome pools of criminal examinations, where he showed severity and beneficence. His clerk sometimes gave accused men money for tobacco or a warm garment as he led them back to the House of Detention. He knew how to be inflexible and charitable. No one extracted a confession so easily without judicial trickery: he had acute observation. This man, apparently simple and absent-minded, could unmask the astutest rogue and subdue a scoundrel. Unusual circumstances had sharpened his perspicacity; but to tell them we must enter his domestic history, for in him the judge was the social side of a larger, less known man.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Twelve years before this story opens, in 1816, during a scarcity that coincided with the Allies’ stay in France, Popinot was named President of the Commission Extraordinary to distribute food to the neighborhood poor, just as he planned to leave the Rue du Fouarre, which they disliked. The great lawyer and clear-sighted criminal judge—whose superiority seemed aberrant to colleagues—had for five years observed legal outcomes without perceiving their causes. As he climbed into lofts, saw poverty, and studied the desperate necessities that drive the poor to crime, compassion filled him. The judge became the Saint Vincent de Paul of these grown children, these suffering toilers.

The change was not immediate. Charity has temptations; it consumes a saint’s purse as roulette consumes a gambler’s. Popinot went from misery to misery; after a year lifting rags that cover public pauperism, he became that quarter’s Providence. He joined the Benevolent Committee and the Charity Organization. Wherever gratuitous service was needed he was ready, doing everything without fuss, like the man with the short cloak who spends his life carrying soup where folk starve.

Popinot acted on a larger sphere and higher plane: he prevented crime, gave work to the unemployed, found refuge for the helpless, distributed aid with discernment where danger threatened, counseled widows, protected homeless children, and became the sleeping partner of small traders. No one at the Courts or in Paris knew of this secret life. There are virtues so splendid they necessitate obscurity; men hide them under a bushel. Those he succored—hard-working by day, tired by night—were little able to praise him; theirs was the gracelessness of children who can never pay because they owe too much. There is such compulsory ingratitude; but who that sows good to reap gratitude can think itself great?

By the end of his second year of apostolic work, Popinot had turned the storeroom at the bottom of his house into a parlor lighted by three iron-barred windows. The walls and ceiling were whitewashed; the furniture consisted of wooden school benches, a clumsy cupboard, a walnut writing-table, and an armchair. In the cupboard were his registers of donations, his tickets for orders for bread, and his diary. He kept his ledger like a tradesman to avoid ruin by kindness. All the neighborhood’s sorrows were entered in a book, each with its little account, as merchants’ customers have theirs. When help was in question he could command information from the police.

Lavienne, a man made for his master, was his aide-de-camp. He redeemed or renewed pawn-tickets and visited the districts most threatened with famine while his master was in court.

From four till seven in summer, six till nine in winter, the room filled with women, children, and paupers while Popinot gave audience. No stove was needed; the crowd warmed the air; Lavienne strewed straw on the wet floor. By long use the benches were as polished as mahogany; at shoulder height the wall bore a dark coating left by rags. The poor loved Popinot so much that when they assembled before his door before daybreak, neither women warming themselves with foot-brasiers nor men swinging their arms for circulation disturbed his sleep. Rag-pickers and other night toilers knew the house, and often saw a light burning in the lawyer’s private room at unholy hours. Even thieves, passing by, said, “That is his house,” and respected it. The morning he gave to the poor, the mid-day hours to criminals, the evening to legal work.

Thus Popinot’s gift of observation was bifrons: he could perceive a pauper’s virtues—good feelings nipped, fine actions in embryo, unrecognized self-sacrifice—just as he could read at the bottom of a man’s conscience the faintest outlines of crime and infer the rest.

Popinot’s inherited fortune was a thousand crowns a year. His wife, sister to M. Bianchon Senior, a doctor at Sancerre, had brought him about twice as much and, dying five years earlier, left it to him. As a supernumerary judge his salary was small, and he had been fully salaried only for four years, explaining his parsimony despite great beneficence. Such indifference to dress—an absent-minded air—seemed a mark of scientific pursuit. To complete the portrait: Popinot was one of the few judges of the Court of the Seine on whom the Legion of Honor ribbon had not been conferred.

Such was the man instructed by the President of the Second Chamber of the Court—to which Popinot had belonged since his reinstatement—to examine the Marquis d’Espard at his wife’s request for a Commission in Lunacy.

The Rue du Fouarre, where so many unhappy wretches swarmed in the early morning, would be deserted by nine and as gloomy and squalid as ever. Bianchon put his horse to a trot to find his uncle amid his business. He smiled at the contrast the judge’s appearance would make in Madame d’Espard’s room and promised himself he would persuade Popinot to dress less ridiculously.

“If only my uncle has a new coat!” thought Bianchon as he turned into the Rue du Fouarre, where a pale light shone from the parlor windows. “I shall do well to talk that over with Lavienne.”

At the sound of wheels half a dozen startled paupers came out from under the gateway and took off their hats on recognizing Bianchon; the doctor, who treated gratuitously the sick recommended by the lawyer, was not less well known to the poor.

Bianchon found his uncle in the middle of the parlor, where benches were occupied by grotesquely dressed patients whose attitudes a draughtsman might have composed as a fine picture. There was the rugged countenance of an old man with a white beard and apostolic head—Saint Peter ready to hand; a young woman suckled her newborn while another of about five stood between her knees, her white bosom gleaming amid rags, the baby with transparent flesh-tints, and the brother promising a future street arab—pathos contrasted with faces crimson with cold. An old woman had the repulsive look of rebellious pauperism, eager to avenge past woes. A young workman, weak and indolent, had a bright intelligent eye revealing faculties crushed by necessity. The majority were women; husbands gone to work left them to plead the family’s cause with the ingenuity typical of the woman of the people. You would have seen torn bandanas, mud-deep skirts, ragged kerchiefs, worn jackets, but eyes that burned like live coals. It was a horrible assemblage, raising disgust at first, then terror when you perceived their resignation was a speculation on benevolence. The two tallow candles that lighted the parlor flickered in a fog caused by the fetid atmosphere.

The magistrate himself was not the least picturesque. He wore a rusty cotton night-cap; having no cravat his neck was visible, red with cold and wrinkled, contrasting with the threadbare collar of his old dressing-gown. His worn face had the half-stupid look of absorbed attention. His lips were puckered like a drawstring bag. His knitted brows seemed to bear the burden of so many confided sorrows: he felt, analyzed, and judged them all. As watchful as a Jewish money-lender, he never raised his eyes from his books and registers but to look into the hearts of those he examined with the flashing glance by which a miser expresses alarm.

Lavienne, behind his master ready to carry out orders, served as a sort of police and welcomed newcomers, encouraging them to overcome shyness. When the doctor appeared there was a stir on the benches. Lavienne turned and was strangely surprised to see Bianchon.

“Ah! It is you, old boy!” exclaimed Popinot, stretching. “What brings you so early?”

“I was afraid you might make an official visit about which I wished to speak to you before I could see you.”

“Well,” said the lawyer, addressing a stout little woman close to him, “if you do not tell me what you want, I cannot guess it, child.”

“Make haste,” said Lavienne. “Do not waste other people’s time.”

The woman, red and speaking low, said she had a green-grocery truck, her last baby to nurse, and owed for his keep. She had hidden her little money.

Popinot guessed the sequel. He asked names: “La Pomponne” and husband “Toupinet,” and, turning over his register, found the husband imprisoned for debt in the Rue du Petit-Banquier. The woman needed ten francs to buy stock. Lavienne took ten francs from a large bag and handed them to her while Popinot noted the loan. Seeing the thrill of delight that made the poor hawker tremble, Bianchon understood her apprehensions.

“You next,” said Lavienne to an old man with a white beard.

Bianchon drew Lavienne aside and asked how long this audience would last.

“Monsieur has had two hundred persons this morning, and there are eight to be turned off,” said Lavienne. “You will have time to pay your early visit, sir.”

“Here, my boy,” said Popinot, taking Horace by the arm; “here are two addresses near this—one in the Rue de Seine, and the other in the Rue de l’Arbalete. Go there at once. Rue de Seine, a young girl has just asphyxiated herself; and Rue de l’Arbalete, you will find a man to remove to your hospital. I will wait breakfast for you.”

Bianchon returned an hour later. The Rue du Fouarre was deserted; day was dawning; his uncle had gone up to his rooms; the last poor wretch whose misery the judge had relieved was departing, and Lavienne’s money bag was empty.

“Well, how are they going on?” asked the old lawyer as the doctor came in.

“The man is dead,” replied Bianchon; “the girl will get over it.”

Since a woman’s eye and hand had been lacking, Popinot’s flat bore an aspect in harmony with its master. The indifference of a man absorbed in one dominant idea left its stamp on everything: dust unconquerable, objects adapted to wrong purposes, papers in flower vases, empty ink-bottles on tables, plates forgotten, matches used as tapers, drawers half-turned out—chaos from plans for order never carried out. The private room, disordered by incessant rummage, bore witness to his unresting pace. The bookcase looked sacked; books were scattered, some open, others face down; registers of proceedings laid on the floor in rows; the floor had not been polished for two years.

Tables and shelves were covered with ex votos, offerings of the grateful poor: a pair of blue glass jars with two glass balls of many-colored fragments, frames of artificial flowers with Popinot’s initials surrounded by hearts and everlasting blooms, boxes of elaborate cabinet work, letter-weights carved in convict style. These masterpieces of patience, enigmas of gratitude, and withered bouquets gave the room the air of a toyshop. He used these works as hiding-places for bills, worn-out pens, scraps of paper. All these pathetic witnesses were thick with dust, dingy, and faded.

Some beautifully stuffed birds, eaten by moth, perched amid the trumpery, presided over by an Angora cat—Madame Popinot’s pet, restored to her no doubt by some impecunious naturalist who repaid charity with a perennial treasure. A local artist had painted portraits of M. and Madame Popinot. Even in the bedroom there were embroidered pin-cushions, cross-stitch landscapes, and elaborately cockled paper crosses.

The window-curtains were black with smoke, the hangings colorless. Between the fireplace and the large square table where the magistrate worked, the cook had set two cups of coffee on a small table and two mahogany horsehair armchairs awaited the uncle and nephew. As daylight, darkened by the windows, could not penetrate this corner, the cook had left two dips burning, their unsnuffed wicks producing a red light like a miser’s slow-burning candle.

“My dear uncle, you ought to wrap yourself more warmly when you go down to that parlor.”

“I cannot bear to keep them waiting, poor souls! Well, and what do you want of me?”

“I have come to ask you to dine tomorrow with the Marquise d’Espard.”

“A relation of ours?” asked Popinot, with genuine absence of mind that made Bianchon laugh.

“No, uncle; the Marquise d’Espard is a high and puissant lady who has laid before the Courts a petition desiring that a Commission in Lunacy should sit on her husband, and you are appointed----”

“And you want me to dine with her! Are you mad?” said the lawyer, taking up the code of proceedings. “Here, read this article prohibiting any magistrate’s eating or drinking in the house of either party in a case he is to decide between. Let her come and see me, your Marquise, if she has anything to say to me. I was to go tomorrow to examine her husband after working the case up to-night.”

He rose, took up a packet under a weight, read its title, and said:

“Here is the affidavit. Since you take an interest in this high and puissant lady, let us see what she wants.”

Popinot wrapped his dressing-gown around him, which constantly slipped, leaving his chest bare; he sopped his bread in the half-cold coffee and opened the petition, reading and commenting now and then, with Bianchon joining in.

The petition began: “Madame Jeanne Clementine Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, wife of M. Charles Maurice Marie Andoche, Comte de Negrepelisse, Marquis d’Espard”—a good family—“landowner, the said Mme. d’Espard living in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore, No. 104, and the said M. d’Espard in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, No. 22,”—to be sure, the President told me he lived in this part of town—“having for her solicitor Maitre Desroches”—Desroches! a pettifogging jobber looked down on by his brethren—”

“Poor fellow!” said Bianchon. “Unluckily he has no money, and he rushes round like the devil in holy water.”

“‘Has the honor to submit to you, Monsieur the President, that for a year past the moral and intellectual powers of her husband, M. d’Espard, have undergone so serious a change that at the present day they have reached the state of dementia and idiocy provided for by Article 448 of the Civil Code, and require the remedies set forth by that article, for the security of his fortune and his person, and to guard the interest of his children whom he keeps to live with him.

“‘That, in point of fact, the mental condition of M. d’Espard, which for some years has given grounds for alarm based on the system he has pursued in the management of his affairs, has reached during the last twelvemonth a deplorable depth of depression; that his infirm will was the first thing to show results; and that its effete state leaves M. the Marquis d’Espard exposed to all the perils of his incompetency, as is proved by the following facts:

“‘For a long time all the income accruing from M. d’Espard’s estates are paid, without any reasonable cause, or even temporary advantage, into the hands of an old woman, whose repulsive ugliness is generally remarked on, named Madame Jeanrenaud, living sometimes in Paris, Rue de la Vrilliere, No. 8, sometimes at Villeparisis, near Claye, in the Department of Seine et Marne, and for the benefit of her son, aged thirty-six, an officer in the ex-Imperial Guards, whom the Marquis d’Espard has placed by his influence in the King’s Guards, as Major in the First Regiment of Cuirassiers. These two persons, who in 1814 were in extreme poverty, have since purchased house-property of considerable value; among other items, recently a large house in the Grand Rue Verte, where the said Jeanrenaud is laying out considerable sums to settle there with the woman Jeanrenaud, intending to marry: these sums amount already to more than a hundred thousand francs. The marriage has been arranged by the intervention of M. d’Espard with his banker, one Mongenod, whose niece he has asked in marriage for the said Jeanrenaud, promising to use his influence to procure him the title and dignity of baron. This has in fact been secured by His Majesty’s letters patent, dated December 29th of last year, at the request of the Marquis d’Espard, as can be proved by His Excellency the Keeper of the Seals, if the Court should require his testimony.

“‘That no reason, not even such as morality and the law would concur in disapproving, can justify the influence which the said Mme. Jeanrenaud exerts over M. d’Espard, who, indeed, sees her very seldom; nor account for his strange affection for the said Baron Jeanrenaud, Major with whom he has little intercourse. And yet their power is so considerable that whenever they need money, if only to gratify a whim, this lady or her son—’ Heh, heh! _No reason even such as morality and the law concur in disapproving!_ What does the clerk or the attorney mean to insinuate?” said Popinot.

Bianchon laughed.

“‘This lady, or her son, obtain whatever they ask of the Marquis d’Espard without demur; and if he has not ready money, M. d’Espard draws bills to be paid by the said Mongenod, who has offered to give evidence to that effect for the petitioner.

“‘That, moreover, in further proof of these facts, lately, on the occasion of the renewal of the leases on the Espard estate, the farmers having paid a considerable premium for renewal, M. Jeanrenaud at once secured payment of it into his own hands.

“‘That the Marquis d’Espard parts with these sums so little of his own free-will that when he was spoken to on the subject he seemed to remember nothing of the matter; that whenever anybody of weight has questioned him as to his devotion to these two persons, his replies have shown so complete an absence of ideas and of sense of his own interests, that there obviously must be some occult cause at work to which the petitioner begs to direct the eye of justice, inasmuch as it is impossible but that this cause should be criminal, malignant, and wrongful, or else of a nature to come under medical jurisdiction; unless this influence is of the kind which constitutes an abuse of moral power—such as can only be described by the word possession—’

“The devil!” exclaimed Popinot. “What do you say to that, doctor? These are strange statements.”

“They might certainly,” said Bianchon, “be an effect of magnetic force.”

“Then do you believe in Mesmer’s nonsense, and his tub, and seeing through walls?”

“Yes, uncle,” said the doctor gravely. “As I heard you read that petition I thought of that. I assure you I have verified, in another sphere of action, several analogous facts proving the unlimited influence one man may acquire over another. Contrary to my brethren, I am convinced of the power of the will regarded as a motor force. All collusion and charlatanism apart, I have seen results of such a possession. Actions promised during sleep by a magnetized patient to the magnetizer have been scrupulously performed on waking. The will of one had become the will of the other.”

“Every kind of action?”

“Yes.”

“Even a criminal act?”

“Even a crime.”

“If it were not from you, I would not listen to such a thing.”

“I will make you witness it,” said Bianchon.

“Hm, hm,” muttered the lawyer. “But supposing that this so-called possession fell under this class of facts, it would be difficult to prove it as legal evidence.”

“If this woman Jeanrenaud is so hideously old and ugly, I do not see what other means of fascination she can have used,” observed Bianchon.

“But,” observed the lawyer, “in 1814, when this fascination is supposed to have taken place, this woman was fourteen years younger; if she had been connected with M. d’Espard ten years before that, these calculations take us back twenty-four years, to a time when the lady may have been young and pretty, and have won for herself and her son a power over M. d’Espard which some men do not know how to evade. Though the source of this power is reprehensible in justice’s sight, it is justifiable in nature. Madame Jeanrenaud may have been aggrieved by the marriage, probably about that time, between the Marquis d’Espard and Mademoiselle de Blamont-Chauvry, and at the bottom of all this may be nothing more than the rivalry of two women, since the Marquis had for a long time lived apart from Mme. d’Espard.”

“But her repulsive ugliness, uncle?”

“Power of fascination is in direct proportion to ugliness,” said the lawyer; “that is the old story. And then think of the smallpox, doctor. But to proceed.

“‘That so long ago as in 1815, to supply the sums required by these two persons, the Marquis d’Espard went with his two children to live in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, in rooms unworthy of his name and rank’—well, we may live as we please—‘that he keeps his two children there, the Comte Clement d’Espard and Vicomte Camille d’Espard, in a style of living quite unsuited to their prospects; that he often wants money, to such a point, that not long since the landlord, one Mariast, put in an execution on the furniture in the rooms; that when this execution was carried out in his presence, the Marquis d’Espard helped the bailiff, whom he treated like a man of rank, paying him all the marks of attention and respect he would have shown to a person of superior birth and dignity to himself.’”

The uncle and nephew glanced at each other and laughed.

“‘That, moreover, every act of his life, besides the facts with reference to the widow Jeanrenaud and the Baron Jeanrenaud, are those of a madman; that for nearly ten years he has given his thoughts exclusively to China, its customs, manners, and history; that he refers everything to a Chinese origin; that when questioned on the subject he confuses the events of the day and the business of yesterday with facts relating to China; that he censures the acts of the Government and the conduct of the King, though he is personally much attached to him, by comparing them with the politics of China;

“‘That this monomania has driven the Marquis d’Espard to conduct devoid of all sense: against the customs of men of rank, and, in opposition to his own professed ideas of the duties of the nobility, he has joined a commercial undertaking, for which he constantly draws bills which, as they fall due, threaten both his honor and his fortune, since they stamp him as a trader, and in default of payment may lead to his being declared insolvent; that these debts, owing to stationers, printers, lithographers, and print-colorists who have supplied materials for his publication, called A Picturesque History of China, now coming out in parts, are so heavy that these tradesmen have requested the petitioner to apply for a Commission in Lunacy to declare M. d’Espard incapable of managing his affairs, as the only way to preserve their own credit.’”

“The man is mad!” exclaimed Bianchon.

“You think so, do you?” said his uncle. “If you listen to only one bell, you hear only one sound.”

“But it seems to me----” said Bianchon.

“But it seems to me,” said Popinot, “that if any relation of mine wanted to get hold of the management of my affairs, and if, instead of being a humble lawyer whose colleagues can any day verify his condition, I were a duke of the realm, an attorney with a little cunning, like Desroches, might bring just such a petition against me.

“‘That his children’s education has been neglected for this monomania; and that he has taught them, against all rules of education, the facts of Chinese history, which contradict the tenets of the Catholic Church. He also has them taught the Chinese dialects.’”

“Here Desroches strikes me as funny,” said Bianchon.

“The petition is drawn up by his head-clerk Godeschal, who, as you know, is not strong in Chinese,” said the lawyer.

“‘That he often leaves his children destitute of the most necessary things; that the petitioner, notwithstanding her entreaties, can never see them; that the said Marquis d’Espard brings them to her only once a year; that, knowing the privations to which they are exposed, she makes vain efforts to give them the things most necessary for their existence, and which they require----’ Oh! Madame la Marquise, this is preposterous. By proving too much you prove nothing. My dear boy,” said the old man, laying the document on his knee, “where is the mother who ever lacked heart and wit and yearning so as to fall below the inspirations suggested by her animal instinct? A mother is as cunning to get at her children as a girl can be in a love intrigue. If your Marquise really wanted to give her children food and clothes, the Devil himself would not have hindered her, heh? That is rather too big a fable for an old lawyer to swallow! To proceed.

“‘That at the age the said children have now attained it is necessary that steps be taken to preserve them from the evil effects of such an education; that they should be provided for as beseems their rank, and that they should cease to have before their eyes the sad example of their father’s conduct;

“‘That there are proofs in support of these allegations which the Court can easily order to be produced. Many times has M. d’Espard spoken of the judge of the Twelfth Arrondissement as a mandarin of the third class; he often speaks of the professors of the College Henri IV. as “men of letters”’—and that offends them! ‘In speaking of the simplest things, he says, “They were not done so in China;” in the course of ordinary conversation he will sometimes allude to Madame Jeanrenaud, or to events which happened in the time of Louis XIV., and then sit plunged in the darkest melancholy; sometimes he fancies he is in China. Several of his neighbors, among others one Edme Becker, medical student, and Jean Baptiste Fremiot, a professor, living under the same roof, are of opinion, after frequent intercourse with the Marquis d’Espard, that his monomania regarding everything Chinese is the result of a scheme laid by the said Baron Jeanrenaud and the widow his mother to bring about the deadening of all the Marquis d’Espard’s mental faculties, since the only service which Mme. Jeanrenaud appears to render M. d’Espard is to procure him everything that relates to the Chinese Empire;

“‘Finally, that the petitioner is prepared to show to the Court that the moneys absorbed by the said Baron and Mme. Jeanrenaud between 1814 and 1828 amount to not less than one million francs.

“‘In confirmation of the facts herein set forth, the petitioner can bring the evidence of persons who are in the habit of seeing the Marquis d’Espard, whose names and professions are subjoined, many of whom have urged her to demand a commission in lunacy to declare M. d’Espard incapable of managing his own affairs, as being the only way to preserve his fortune from the effects of his maladministration and his children from his fatal influence.

“‘Taking all this into consideration, M. le President, and the affidavits subjoined, the petitioner desires that it may please you, inasmuch as the foregoing facts sufficiently prove the insanity and incompetency of the Marquis d’Espard herein described with his titles and residence, to order that, to the end that he may be declared incompetent by law, this petition and the documents in evidence may be laid before the King’s public prosecutor; and that you will charge one of the judges of this Court to make his report to you on any day you may be pleased to name, and thereupon to pronounce judgment,’ etc.

“And here,” said Popinot, “is the President’s order instructing me! Well, what does the Marquise d’Espard want with me? I know everything. But I shall go tomorrow with my registrar to see M. le Marquis, for this does not seem at all clear to me.”

“Listen, my dear uncle, I have never asked the least little favor of you that had to do with your legal functions; well, now I beg you to show Madame d’Espard the kindness her situation deserves. If she came here, you would listen to her?”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, go and listen to her in her own house. Madame d’Espard is a sickly, nervous, delicate woman who would faint in your rat-hole of a place. Go in the evening, instead of accepting her dinner, since the law forbids your eating or drinking at your client’s expense.”

“And does not the law forbid you from taking any legacy from your dead?” said Popinot, fancying irony on his nephew’s lips.

“Come, uncle, if it were only to enable you to get at the truth of this business, grant my request. You will come as the examining judge, since matters do not seem clear. Deuce take it! It is as necessary to cross-question the Marquise as it is to examine the Marquis.”

“You are right,” said the lawyer. “It is quite possible that it is she who is mad. I will go.”

“I will call for you. Write down in your engagement book: ‘Tomorrow evening at nine, Madame d’Espard.’” Good!” said Bianchon, seeing his uncle make a note of the engagement.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Next evening at nine Bianchon climbed his uncle’s dusty staircase and found him absorbed in a complicated judgment. The coat Lavienne had ordered had not arrived, so Popinot wore his old stained overcoat—the plain Popinot whose homely look amused those who did not know his private life. Bianchon got permission to pull his cravat straight and button his coat; he tried to hide the stains by crossing the breast so the right side lay over the left and showed a newer front. In a minute, however, the judge rucked the coat over his chest in his habitual way of stuffing his hands into his pockets. The coat, wrinkled and ill-fitting, made a hump in the middle of his back and left a gap between waistcoat and trousers where his shirt showed; Bianchon only noticed this absurdity as his uncle entered the Marquise’s room.

A brief sketch of the lady before whom they now found themselves is necessary. Madame d’Espard had been the fashion in Paris for seven years. Though her register showed her as thirty-three, she presented herself at evening salons as twenty-two. She achieved this by rigorous affectations: elaborate curls, living in twilight, affected frailty to sit under light filtered by muslin, cold baths, horsehair mattresses, frugal eating and drinking, and vigilance over small habits to preserve youthful appearance. Her regimen worked: a clear complexion, an unwrinkled brow, and a lithe figure. She was absolutely self-absorbed; men amused her but never moved her to real passion. When offended she avenged herself coldly, never making a scene but wreaking ruin with two words if she chose.

Separated from M. d’Espard in 1815, she had kept the house and carriage and lived independently on twenty-six thousand francs a year. She kept her children out of sight—her elder fifteen, younger thirteen—and her social circle believed her far younger than she was. Between 1816 and 1818 she lived withdrawn while society recovered from political storms; by 1820 she resumed appearing at Court and entertaining. From 1821 to 1827 she lived in great style, fixed hours for visits, and seized a social throne once shared by great women she supplanted. Her drawing-room acquired political individuality: through friendships with influential women—an attached duchess, a foreign lady with diplomatic connections, and an antiquated countess—she exerted a covert influence beyond fashion. “What do they say at Madame d’Espard’s?” became a question of weight; political men praised her diplomatic capacity and sought her whist-table.

She was indiscreet but also persistent on behalf of protégés, not so much out of altruism as vanity. She wanted to live at every point of life’s largest circle. Numerous young men courted her—de Marsay, de Ronquerolles, de Montriveau, and others—some admitted despite their wives’ exclusion; even prominent bankers endured her terms. She had studied Paris life thoroughly; no compromising note existed to be used against her because her conduct never gave a man advantage.

Her person served her designs: a youthful figure and a voice she could modulate. She practiced aristocratic distance, keeping men at arm’s length, and couched noble sentiments in conversation that masked her selfhood. Rastignac, attempting to attach himself to her, saw her as a political tool and was becoming her instrument until he could make her his—an uncertain prospect that both flattered and threatened him.

The Hôtel d’Espard required a large household. Grand receptions were on the ground floor; she lived on the first. The fine staircase, Versailles-style rooms, and the whole establishment spoke of great fortune. When Popinot saw the carriage gates, lodge, porter, courtyard, stables, arrangement of flowers, and the footmen in livery, his eyes, used to peering into the dignity of misery beneath muddy clothing, now examined the furniture and splendor to pierce the misery of grandeur.

“M. Popinot—M. Bianchon,” announced the servant at the boudoir door. The Marquise sat in a rococo armchair she had set the fashion for; Rastignac was at her left in a low chair. A third person stood by the chimney-piece: a tall, lean man in black, grave and silent. He looked like a blade—cold, harsh, with a muddy complexion—listening and passing judgment, his attitude terrifying. Now and then the Marquise consulted him; however eager her questions, he remained as rigid as a statue. Bianchon suspected this grave man’s influence.

Popinot entered awkwardly—left hand in pocket, right hand holding a hat with a greasy lining—and drew an amused response from Rastignac, who laughed at his foolishness. The Marquise bowed and made an effort to rise, affected weakness and courtesy. The man by the fireplace pushed forward two chairs. Popinot sat with his hat between his knees and took in the costly trifles of the boudoir—the gilt chandeliers, clock, porcelain—as he listened to the Marquise speak in a piping tone.

“Monsieur, I owe you a million thanks—” she began.

“A million thanks,” he thought; “that is too many; it means nothing.” She thanked him for visiting an unhappy client who could not come out; he thought the client must be as sound as a bell. He then, with frank good nature, stated that a judge must seek truth guided by conscience more than mere law. While he spoke, Rastignac shook hands with Bianchon; the Marquise welcomed the doctor with a significant bow.

“Who is that?” Bianchon whispered, indicating the dark man.

“The Chevalier d’Espard, the Marquis’ brother.” Popinot inquired into the separation that put the Marquise in pursuit of a Commission in Lunacy against her husband. She told her prepared story: M. d’Espard’s temper changed in early 1816; he proposed a move near Briançon that she refused, and the next day he left her and took the children to live in Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève. Popinot asked whether she had ever sought custody—she had—but the elder must be sixteen, Popinot noted. She corrected him—fifteen—making Rastignac and Bianchon exchange looks: her statements were precise to suit her suit.

Popinot scrutinized her petition and her explanations. He questioned if M. d’Espard had known Madame Jeanrenaud before marriage; she denied it with asperity. She explained that her family had married her at sixteen to M. d’Espard, then twenty-six, whose manners and fortune pleased them. He seemed ambitious and pious; she liked ambitious men. She blamed Madame Jeanrenaud for turning his head and ruining the family’s prospects. Popinot’s questioning, appearing simple, sought to test the coherence and motive of her narrative.

Popinot’s practical approach extended from petty shop-talk to probing legal consequences. While the Chevalier stood like a measuring eye, Popinot inspected the boudoir’s glitter and led the conversation to sturdier ground. He noted the Marquise’s sumptuous rooms and asked: how could a woman with twenty-six thousand francs a year support such a household? The Marquise and Rastignac claimed household expenses equal and perhaps superior to the Jeanrenauds’, whom she accused of living extravagantly—stable with five horses, three carriages, phaeton, brougham, cabriolet—summing between fifteen and sixteen thousand francs yearly for stables alone; furniture reputedly cost more than a hundred thousand francs. Popinot calculated that at such outlay the Jeanrenauds’ expenses might reach fifty to sixty thousand francs a year—impossible for a formerly poor family without massive capital, since a million yields scarcely forty thousand a year. Madame d’Espard insisted the Jeanrenauds had invested sums when funds paid high rates and might have income exceeding sixty thousand francs. Rastignac joined in the reckoning, and the Marquise conceded she spent about the same.

Popinot, incredulous by habit and duty, pointed out the Court’s responsibility: if the husband were declared incapable and a trustee appointed, who would the trustee be? “His brother,” the Marquise answered, naming the Chevalier. Popinot gently exposed the peril: if she—asking the Court to deprive M. d’Espard of control of his property—could not show her own accounts and conduct were above reproach, the Court would suspect self-interest. A judge must examine the motives of a petitioner, he said; the request could be tainted by passion or desire for money. If she spent sixty thousand a year on twenty-six thousand income, the Court would imagine debts and suspect the petitioner’s motives. Popinot’s words, delivered with a clumsy good-nature that concealed acuity, stung the Marquise. The Chevalier, who could see the danger, said nothing.

The judge went on: where would furniture and new furnishings have come from? Had she a royal pension or indemnity? Had she power of attorney from her husband to manage property? The Marquise became nettled, forgot her strategy, and admitted M. d’Espard had given her no such power; she protested at being questioned as if her motives were suspect. Popinot replied that the husband’s counsel would surely probe into her debts and conduct if the Commission went forward. A trustee’s appointment could place her life under scrutiny—an advisor less indulgent than Popinot might view her differently. He urged frankness, saying he only wished to understand how she maintained such expenditure on her declared income.

The Marquise bristled. Popinot’s simple irony—pointing to porcelain and other Oriental pieces—made Bianchon smile and petrified Rastignac, while the Marquise bit her thin lips. When the judge pushed to know if she had any debts, the Marquise flared, calling the questions cunning. She admitted, with haughty candor when pressed, that she sought to keep up her connections for the sake of her children: by receiving friends, keeping connections, and contracting debts she had prepared a brilliant career for them and secured favors. “To have what has been acquired, many a man of business would gladly pay all it has cost me,” she said. Popinot responded that her devoted conduct did her honor; he blamed her for nothing but must weigh facts as a judge.

Realizing Popinot would not be swayed by flattery, the Marquise, offended, resolved to seek other means to secure success. Popinot, however, had gone straight to the mark: the Marquise’s admissions and the household’s display put her in a position where the Court might readily suspect personal interest. The Chevalier’s silence and Popinot’s calm, probing manner revealed a legal mind that could not be bought by fashion or wit. The conversation ended with the Marquise insisting he question M. d’Espard instead; she left with cool pride, and Popinot excused himself politely.

Outside, Rastignac murmured to Bianchon about the possibilities: the Keeper of the Seals would be with the Marquise the next day. Bianchon demurred: Popinot was not one to be managed. Popinot shrugged the situation off with judicial humor: many an attempt to obtain a Commission in Lunacy ends with “insufficient evidence.” He noted with wry justice that society often forgives social crimes while punishing petty ones severely.

The next day at four, a very stout dame huffed up Judge Popinot’s stairs: Madame Jeanrenaud herself, disconcertingly plain and provincial. She had difficulty alighting from a green landau and announced herself in a wheezy voice as if affronted at being summoned “exactly as if I were a thief.” The judge was amazed at her appearance. Smallpox had left her face pitted and red; her nose was pug, forehead low, the whole face round; chestnut hair under a cap, bright country eyes, an honest gaze. She was a burly, homely woman, too large for stays because of health precautions, wearing a green gown trimmed with chinchilla. Her speech was hearty and blurred by coughs; everything about her contradicted the Marquise’s insinuation that she had seductive arts. She laughed at the idea of being able to seduce anyone; she could not tie her shoes nor stoop. She told the judge she had married Jeanrenaud, a good fellow who once headed a salt-barges crew, had a son who had served in the Imperial Guard, and had been turned hideous by smallpox after her husband drowned. She insisted she was no seductress.

Popinot asked bluntly why M. d’Espard had given her sums of money. She replied that he had been generous with “huge sums,” but she felt she was not at liberty to explain his reasons. She was shocked to hear that his family planned legal action and declared that she would rather return every sou than cause him trouble. She promised to tell her son at once and dashed downstairs to act. Popinot, reassured by her frank rusticity, said to himself that she told no lies. He resolved to see the Marquis d’Espard the next day to learn the whole story.

Thus the scene closed with the judge convinced that the truth required direct inquiry into M. d’Espard’s condition and motives. Popinot’s unpretentious, methodical questioning had exposed the Marquise’s vulnerabilities: her debt-driven lifestyle on a limited income, the risk that her petition for a Commission in Lunacy might be viewed as self-interested, and the quiet but dangerous influence of the silent Chevalier. Rastignac’s ambitions and the Marquise’s social craft offered color to the case, but Popinot’s concern was judicial: to discover facts that justified or condemned the attempt to deprive a father of his civil rights. He would go next to the Marquis to hear his side, having seen the plainly honest Madame Jeanrenaud and concluded that the web of fashion and influence could not hide the basic legal questions he had raised.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
People who have passed the age when a man wastes his vitality know how small incidents can influence important events, and will not be surprised at the weight here given to the following minor fact. Next day Popinot had an attack of coryza, a complaint not dangerous, inadequately called a cold in the head.

The judge, who could not suppose the delay serious, feeling a little feverish, kept his room and did not go to see the Marquis d’Espard. This lost day was to the affair what the cup of soup taken by Marie de Médici on the Day of Dupes had been, delaying her meeting with Louis XIII and enabling Richelieu to arrive at Saint-Germain before her and recapture his royal slave.

Before accompanying the lawyer and his registering clerk to the Marquis d’Espard’s house, it may be well to glance at the home and private affairs of this father of sons whom his wife’s petition represented as mad.

Here and there in the old parts of Paris a few buildings still show an intention of decorating the city and a love of property that leads the owner to give a durable character to the structure. The house in which M. d’Espard then lived, in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève, was one of these old mansions, built in stone and possessing a certain richness of style; but time had blackened the stone, and revolutions had damaged it both outside and in. The dignitaries who formerly dwelt near the University having disappeared with the great ecclesiastical foundations, this house had become the home of industry and of inhabitants it was never meant to shelter. During the last century a printing establishment had worn down the polished floors, soiled the carved wood, blackened the walls, and altered the principal internal arrangements. Formerly the residence of a Cardinal, this fine house was now divided among plebeian tenants. The character of the architecture showed it had been built under Henry III., Henry IV, and Louis XIII, when the hôtels Mignon and Serpente were erected nearby, with the palace of the Princess Palatine and the Sorbonne. An old man remembered it called, in the last century, the hôtel Duperron, so it seemed probable that the illustrious Cardinal of that name had built, or perhaps merely lived in it.

There still exists, indeed, in the corner of the courtyard, a perron or flight of several outer steps by which the house is entered; and the way into the garden on the garden front is down a similar flight. In spite of dilapidations, the luxury lavished by the architect on the balustrade and entrance porch crowning these two perrons suggests the simple-minded purpose of commemorating the owner’s name, a sort of sculptured pun our ancestors often allowed themselves. Finally, archaeologists can still discern in the medallions on the principal front traces of the cords of the Roman hat.

M. le Marquis d’Espard lived on the ground floor, no doubt to enjoy the garden, which might be called spacious for that neighborhood, and which lay open for his children’s health. The situation of the house, in a street on a steep hill as its name indicates, secured these ground-floor rooms against damp. M. d’Espard had taken them, doubtless for a moderate price, rents being low when he settled there to be among the schools and superintend his boys’ education. Moreover, the state of the place, with everything to repair, had induced the owner to be accommodating. Thus M. d’Espard could go to some expense to settle himself suitably without being accused of extravagance. The loftiness of the rooms, the paneling of which nothing survived but the frames, the decoration of the ceilings, all displayed the dignity which the prelacy stamped on whatever it attempted or created, and which artists still discern in the smallest relic that remains, be it a book, a dress, the panel of a bookcase, or an armchair.

The Marquis had the rooms painted in the rich brown tones loved by the Dutch and the citizens of Old Paris, hues that lend good effects to the painter of genre. The panels were hung with plain paper in harmony with the paint. The window curtains were of inexpensive materials, chosen to produce a generally happy result; the furniture was not too crowded and judiciously placed. Anyone entering this home could not resist a sense of sweet peacefulness produced by the perfect calm, the stillness, the unpretentious unity of color, the keeping of the picture, in a painter’s phrase. A certain nobleness in the details, the exquisite cleanliness of the furniture, and a perfect concord of men and things all brought the word “suavity” to the lips.

Few persons were admitted to the rooms used by the Marquis and his two sons, whose life might perhaps seem mysterious to their neighbors. In a wing towards the street, on the third floor, there were three large rooms left in the dilapidated, grotesque bareness to which they had been reduced by the printing works. These three rooms, devoted to the evolution of the Picturesque History of China, served as a writing-room, a depository, and a private room where M. d’Espard sat part of the day; for after breakfast till four in the afternoon the Marquis remained on the third floor to work at the publication he had undertaken. Visitors wanting to see him commonly found him there, and often the two boys on their return from school resorted thither. Thus the ground-floor rooms were a sort of sanctuary where father and sons spent their time from the hour of dinner till the next day, and his domestic life was carefully closed against the public eye.

His only servants were a cook—an old woman long attached to his family—and a man-servant forty years old who had been with him when he married Mademoiselle de Blamont. His children’s nurse had also remained with them, and the minute care to which the apartment bore witness revealed the sense of order and the maternal affections expended by this woman in her master’s interest, in the management of his house, and the charge of his children. These three good souls, grave and uncommunicative, seemed to have entered into the idea that ruled the Marquis’ domestic life. The contrast between their habits and those of most servants was a peculiarity that cast an air of mystery over the house and fomented the calumny to which M. d’Espard himself lent occasion. Very laudable motives had made him determine never to be on visiting terms with any of the other tenants. In undertaking to educate his boys he wished to keep them from all contact with strangers. Perhaps, too, he wished to avoid the intrusion of neighbors.

In a man of his rank, at a time when the Quartier Latin was distracted by Liberalism, such conduct was sure to rouse petty passions, feelings whose folly is only measured by their meanness, the outcome of porters’ gossip and malevolent tattle from door to door, all unknown to M. d’Espard and his retainers. His man-servant was stigmatized as a Jesuit, his cook as a sly fox; the nurse was in collusion with Madame Jeanrenaud to rob the madman. The madman was the Marquis. By degrees the other tenants came to regard as proofs of madness a number of things they had noticed in M. d’Espard, passing them through the sieve of their judgment without discerning any reasonable motive.

Having no belief in the success of the History of China, they managed to convince the landlord that M. d’Espard had no money just at a time when, with the forgetfulness that often befalls busy men, he had allowed the tax-collector to send him a summons for non-payment of arrears. The landlord forthwith claimed his quarter’s rent from January 1st by sending in a receipt, which the porter’s wife amused herself by detaining. On the 15th a summons to pay was served on M. d’Espard; the portress had delivered it at her leisure, and he supposed it to be some misunderstanding, not conceiving of any incivility from a man in whose house he had lived for twelve years. The Marquis was actually seized by a bailiff at the time his man-servant had gone to carry the money for the rent to the landlord.

This arrest, assiduously reported to those with whom he was in treaty for his undertaking, alarmed some who were already doubtful of M. d’Espard’s solvency because of the enormous sums said to be received from him by Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother. And indeed, these suspicions had some excuse in the Marquis’ extreme economy in housekeeping. He conducted it as a ruined man might. His servants always paid in ready money for the most trifling necessaries, acting as if they chose not to take credit; had they asked for credit, they might have been refused, such was the extent of the calumnious gossip. There are tradesmen who like customers who pay badly when they see them often, while they hate others; and very good ones hold themselves on too high a level to allow familiarity. Men are made so; in almost every class they will allow to a gossip, or a vulgar soul that flatters them, facilities and favors they refuse to the superiority they resent. The shopkeeper who rails at the Court has his courtiers.

In short, the manners of the Marquis and his children were certain to arouse ill-feeling in their neighbors, and to work them up by degrees to malevolence when men do not hesitate at meanness if it may damage the adversary they have themselves created.

M. d’Espard was a gentleman, as his wife was a lady, by birth and breeding; noble types already rare in France that the observer can easily count. These two characters are based on primitive ideas, on beliefs that may be called innate, on habits formed in infancy and which have ceased to exist. To believe in pure blood, in a privileged race, to stand in thought above other men—must we not from birth have measured the distance that divides patricians from the mob? To command, must we not have never met our equal? And finally, must not education inculcate the ideas with which Nature inspires those great men on whose brow she has placed a crown before their mother has ever set a kiss there? These ideas and this education are no longer possible in France, where for forty years chance has arrogated the right of making noblemen by dipping them in the blood of battles, gilding them with glory, crowning them with the halo of genius; where the abolition of entail and of eldest sonship, by frittering away estates, compels the nobleman to attend to his own business instead of affairs of state, and where personal greatness can only be acquired by long patient toil: quite a new era.

Regarded as a relic of that great institution known as feudalism, M. d’Espard deserved respectful admiration. If he believed himself by blood the superior of other men, he also believed in all the obligations of nobility; he had the virtues and strength it demands. He had brought up his children in his principles, teaching them from the cradle the religion of their caste. A deep sense of their own dignity, pride of name, the conviction that they were by birth great, gave rise to in them a kingly pride, the courage of knights, and the protecting kindness of a baronial lord; their manners, harmonizing with their notions, would have become princes, and offended all the world of the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève—a world, above all others, of equality, where everyone believed M. d’Espard was ruined, and where all, from the lowest to the highest, refused the privileges of nobility to a nobleman without money, because they were ready to allow an enriched bourgeois to usurp them. Thus the lack of communion between this family and others was as much moral as physical.

In father and children alike, their personality harmonized with the spirit within. M. d’Espard, then about fifty, might have sat as a model representing the aristocracy of birth in the nineteenth century. He was slight and fair; the outline and general expression of his face showed native distinction suggesting lofty sentiments, but bore the impress of a deliberate coldness that commanded respect perhaps a little too decidedly. His aquiline nose bent slightly at the tip from left to right, a crookedness not devoid of grace; his blue eyes and high forehead, prominent enough at the brows to form a thick ridge that checked the light and shaded his eyes, indicated rectitude, perseverance, and perfect loyalty, while giving a singular look to his countenance. This penthouse forehead might hint at a touch of madness, and his thick-knitted eyebrows added to the apparent eccentricity. He had the white well-kept hands of a gentleman; his foot was high and narrow. His hesitating speech—not merely a stammer but also in the expression of his ideas—produced on the hearer the impression of a man who, in familiar phrase, comes and goes, feels his way, tries everything, breaks off his gestures, and finishes nothing. This defect was superficial, in contrast with the decisiveness of a firmly-set mouth and the strongly marked character of his physiognomy. His rather jerky gait matched his mode of speech. These peculiarities helped affirm his supposed insanity. In spite of elegant appearance, he was systematically parsimonious in personal expenses, wearing the same black frock-coat for three or four years, brushed with extreme care by his old man-servant.

As to the children, both were handsome, endowed with a grace not excluding an expression of aristocratic disdain. They had bright coloring, clear eyes, transparent flesh revealing purity, regularity of life, and a due proportion of work and play. Both had black hair, blue eyes, and a twist in their nose like their father; their mother perhaps transmitted the dignity of speech, look, and mien hereditary in the Blamont-Chauvrys. Their voices, as clear as crystal, had an emotional softness that proved seductive; they had, in short, the voice a woman would willingly listen to after feeling the flame of their looks. But above all, they had the modesty of pride, a chaste reserve, a touch-me-not which at maturity might seem intentional coyness, so much did their demeanor inspire a wish to know them. The elder, Comte Clément de Négrepelisse, was close upon his sixteenth year. For two years he had ceased to wear the pretty English round jacket which his brother, Vicomte Camille d’Espard, still wore. The Count, who for six months had gone no more to the Collège Henri IV, was dressed in the style of a young man enjoying the first pleasures of fashion. His father had not wished to condemn him to a year’s useless study of philosophy; he was trying to give his knowledge consistency by the study of transcendental mathematics. At the same time, the Marquis was having him taught Eastern languages, the international law of Europe, heraldry, and history from original sources, charters, early documents, and collections of edicts. Camille had lately begun to study rhetoric.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The day Popinot arranged to question M. d’Espard was a Thursday, a holiday. At about nine in the morning, before their father awoke, the two boys were playing in the garden. Clément found it hard to refuse his brother’s entreaties to go to the shooting-gallery for the first time; the Viscount pressed him, and they wrestled like schoolboys. Their uproar woke their father, who watched them unseen from his window. The Marquis amused himself seeing them tumble and seize each other, their faces flushed; the sight gave him a rare moment of happiness. Two other persons, one on the second and one on the first floor, peered into the garden and, repeating a malicious rumour, declared the old madman amused himself by making his children fight. Heads soon appeared at other windows. The Marquis called his sons with a word; they climbed to the window and jumped into his room, and Clément obtained the permission Camille had asked for.

Throughout the house everyone spoke of this fresh instance of the Marquis’ supposed insanity. When Popinot arrived about noon with his clerk, the portress, breathless, escorted him to the third floor and announced that “no later than this morning M. d’Espard had set his two children to fight, and laughed like a monster on seeing the younger bite the elder till he bled, and no doubt he longed to see them kill each other. Don’t ask me the reason why,” she added; “he does not show himself!”

She led the judge to a door plastered with announcements of the Picturesque History of China; the muddied floor, dirty banisters, printer’s marks on the door, a dilapidated window, carvings on the ceiling done by apprentices with smoky dips, piles of paper—whether from intentional slovenliness or neglect—made the place look like the Marquise’s account. The porter’s wife, feeling she had furnished the evidence, triumphantly pointed to the manufactory, “where the Chinese swallow up enough to feed the whole neighborhood.”

Popinot suppressed a smile; his clerk stifled one. They entered the outer room where an old man, evidently shopman, clerk, and cashier in one, sat among long shelves of published numbers. A wooden partition with a grating and green curtains cut off the inner office; a till with a slit marked the cash-desk. Popinot inquired for M. d’Espard. The shopman opened the next room and showed a venerable, simply dressed white-headed man wearing the Cross of Saint-Louis seated at a desk. He paused comparing colored prints and then rose. The inner room was modestly furnished with books and proof-sheets.

“Monsieur le Marquis?” Popinot asked.

“No, monsieur,” the old man replied, rising; “what do you want with him?” he added, coming forward with the bearing of a gentleman.

“We wish to speak with him on business exclusively personal to himself,” Popinot answered.

The shopman entered the furthest room, where the Marquis sat by the fire reading a paper. That innermost room had a shabby carpet, gray holland curtains, a few mahogany chairs, two armchairs, a revolving-front desk, an office table, and on the chimney-shelf a dingy clock and two old candlesticks. The old man brought chairs as if he were master; the Marquis allowed it. After preliminaries, Popinot explained the object of their visit: he was judge of the Inferior Court of Appeal for the Department of the Seine, charged by the President to examine the Marquis on facts alleged in a petition for a Commission in Lunacy filed by the Marquise d’Espard.

At the mention of the petition the Marquis, usually pale, flushed scarlet with anger; he trembled, sat down, placed his paper on the chimney-piece, and looked down. He soon recovered and looked steadily at the judge to read his character.

“How is it, monsieur,” he asked, “that I have had no notice of such a petition?”

“Persons on whom such a commission is held not being supposed to have the use of their reason, any notice of the petition is unnecessary. The duty of the Court chiefly consists in verifying the petitioner’s allegations,” Popinot replied.

The Marquis saw fairness, and asked what he ought to do. Popinot told him to answer fully. The Marquis, troubled, feared any explanation might attach blame to Madame d’Espard and asked whether the Court might refrain from saying anything that would annoy her if the report favored him. The two men exchanged a mutual sentiment of magnanimity. Popinot dismissed his clerk, saying he would call him only if necessary, and promised courtesy should he find a misunderstanding.

“There is a leading fact put forward by Madame d’Espard,” the judge said after a pause. “It refers to the dissipation of your fortune to the advantage of a certain Madame Jeanrenaud, the widow of a bargemaster—or rather to her son, Colonel Jeanrenaud—for whom you are said to have procured an appointment, exhausted your influence with the King, and at last secured a good marriage. The petition suggests such friendship is more than natural—more than morality might approve—”

A sudden flush crimsoned the Marquis’ brow; tears started to his eyes, then pride crushed them.

“To tell you the truth, monsieur,” he said in a broken voice, “you place me in a strange dilemma. The motives of my conduct were to have died with me. To reveal them I must disclose secret wounds, place the honor of my family in your keeping, and speak of myself—a delicate matter. I hope, monsieur, that it will all remain between us. You will, no doubt, find in legal formulas one which will allow judgment without betrayal of my confidences.”

“So far as that goes, it is perfectly possible, Monsieur le Marquis,” Popinot assured him.

“Some time after my marriage,” the Marquis began, “my wife having run into considerable expenses, I had to borrow. You know the position of noble families during the Revolution; we could not keep stewards; gentlemen managed their affairs themselves. Most of my title-deeds had been brought to Paris from Languedoc, Provence, or le Comtat by my father, who feared, not without reason, the inquisition which family title-deeds—the ‘parchments’ of the privileged—brought down on the owners.

“Our name is Negrepelisse; d’Espard is a title acquired in Henri IV’s time by a marriage that brought us the estates and titles of the house of d’Espard on condition of bearing an escutcheon of pretence. At that alliance we lost Negrepelisse, a small town, once as famous during the religious struggles as was my ancestor. Captain de Negrepelisse was ruined by the burning of all his property, for the Protestants did not spare a friend of Montluc’s.

“My great-grandfather, the Marquis d’Espard, like me, was early placed at the head of his family. His father had dissipated his wife’s fortune, leaving his son only the entailed estates of the d’Espards, burdened with a jointure. Being in favor with Louis XIV., the young Marquis acquired a fortune. But—a blot stained our escutcheon—an unconfessed and terrible stain of blood and disgrace which I have made it my business to wipe out. I discovered the secret among the deeds relating to Negrepelisse and packets of letters.”

The Marquis spoke with solemn, passionate certainty.

“The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes was an opportunity for many favorites to enrich themselves. Louis XIV. bestowed confiscated lands of Protestants who did not take prompt steps to sell. I have ascertained beyond doubt that two ducal fortunes, including ours, derive from lands seized from a Protestant family. I will not detail to you the maneuvers employed to entrap refugees who had fortunes to carry away. It is enough that the lands of Negrepelisse and those of Gravenges had been in the hands of a Protestant family. My grandfather recovered them by royal gift; this gift was effected by documents hall-marked by atrocious iniquity. The owner, thinking he could return, had gone through the form of a sale and was going to Switzerland to join his family. He was arrested by order of the governor; the trustee confessed the truth; the unfortunate merchant was hanged, and my ancestor had the two estates. I would gladly have ignored my ancestor’s share in the plot; but the governor was his uncle on the mother’s side, and I read a letter in which he begged him to apply to Deodatus, the name agreed upon to designate the King. The letter’s jocularity about the victim filled me with horror. Ultimately, the ransom money sent by the refugee family was kept by the governor, who despatched the merchant all the same.”

The Marquis paused, as though the memory still weighed upon him.

“This unfortunate family were named Jeanrenaud,” he continued. “That name explains my conduct. I could never think without keen pain of the secret disgrace that weighed on my family. That fortune enabled my grandfather to marry a demoiselle de Navarreins-Lansac, heiress to the younger branch, who were then richer than the elder. My father thus became one of the largest landowners in the kingdom. Though ill-gotten, this property proved singularly profitable.

“For my part, determined to remedy the mischief, I wrote to Switzerland and knew no peace till I traced the refugee’s heirs. At last I discovered the Jeanrenauds, reduced to want, had left Fribourg and returned to France. I found a M. Jeanrenaud, lieutenant in a cavalry regiment under Napoleon, the sole heir. In my eyes their rights were clear. To establish a prescriptive right, there must have been some possibility of proceeding against those in enjoyment of it. To whom could these refugees have appealed? Their Court of Justice was not on earth but in heaven,” and the Marquis struck his hand on his heart. “I did not choose that my children should think of me as I had thought of my father and ancestors. I aimed to leave them an unblemished inheritance and escutcheon. After all, politically speaking, ought emigrés appealing against revolutionary confiscations to keep property derived from antecedent confiscations by positive crimes?

“I found in M. Jeanrenaud and his mother the most scrupulous honesty; to hear them you would say they were robbing me. They accepted no more than the value of the lands at the time the King bestowed them on my family. The price was fixed at eleven hundred thousand francs, to be paid at my convenience without interest. To accomplish this I had to forego my income for a long time. Then I discovered the true nature of Madame d’Espard. When I proposed we should leave Paris and live in the country on half her income to repay faster, she treated me as a madman. I then understood my wife’s coldness and little affection for our children, whom she abandoned to me without regret. I determined to leave her the command of her fortune after paying our common debts, for, as she told me, it was no business of hers to pay for my follies. Lacking enough income for our living and our sons’ education, I resolved to educate them myself, to make them gentlemen and men of feeling. By investing in the funds I could pay off the obligation sooner by taking advantage of price improvements. If I had kept four thousand francs a year for my boys and myself, I could only have paid off twenty thousand crowns a year, taking almost eighteen years. As it is, I have lately repaid the whole eleven hundred thousand francs. Thus I enjoy having made this restitution without doing my children the smallest wrong.

“These, monsieur, are the reasons for the payments made to Madame Jeanrenaud and her son.”

“So Madame d’Espard knew the motives of your retirement?” asked Popinot, controlling his emotion.

“Yes, monsieur,” the Marquis replied.

Popinot shrugged expressively and rose. He opened the door into the next room and called his clerk back. After a brief question about the Marquis’ apparent business—why, as a man of rank, he carried on a trade—the Marquis signed to the judge to leave the room. “We cannot discuss that matter here,” he said; “I took those rooms for the office of this undertaking. The History is being brought out by one of the most respectable firms in Paris, and not by me.”

He showed Popinot into the ground-floor rooms, which were his apartment. Popinot, touched by the poetry pervading the dwelling, noted the windows open to the garden, the wholesome smell of the earth, the sunshine brightening the rather gloomy woodwork. He felt convinced no lunatic would invent such tender harmony.

“I should like just such an apartment,” he thought. “Are you thinking of leaving this part of town?” he inquired.

“I hope so,” replied the Marquis. “But I shall remain till my younger son finishes his studies and their characters are formed, before introducing them to the world and their mother’s circle. After giving them solid instruction, I intend to take them to the capitals of Europe so they may see men and things and become accustomed to the languages they have learned. And, monsieur,” he added, giving Popinot a chair, “I could not discuss the book on China with you in the presence of an old friend of my family, the Comte de Nouvion, who, having emigrated, has returned to France without fortune, and who is my partner in this concern less for profit than for employment. Without telling him my motives, I explained I was as poor as he but had enough to start a speculation in which he might be usefully employed. My tutor was the Abbé Grozier, whom Charles X., on my recommendation, appointed Keeper of the Books at the Arsenal. The Abbé was deeply learned about China; he made me heir to this knowledge at an age when fanaticism for learned things is easy. At twenty-five I knew Chinese, and I confess I have never been able to check an exclusive admiration for that nation, who conquered their conquerors, whose annals extend beyond myth or Bible times, whose institutions have preserved their empire, whose monuments are gigantic, whose administration is perfect, among whom revolutions seem impossible, who have regarded ideal beauty as barren in art, and who have carried luxury and industry to such lengths that we cannot outdo them, while they equal us in those matters we suppose superior.

“Still, monsieur, though I jest comparing China with European states, I am not a Chinaman; I am a French gentleman. If you doubt the financial side, I can prove we have two thousand five hundred subscribers; the work is literary, iconographical, statistical, and religious; its importance has been appreciated; our subscribers belong to every nation in Europe, with twelve hundred in France. Our book will cost about three hundred francs, and the Comte de Nouvion will derive from it six to seven thousand francs a year for his comfort, which was the real motive. For my part, I aimed only at affording my children some pleasures. The hundred thousand francs I made will pay for fencing lessons, horses, dress, theatres, masters— all the little indulgences a father enjoys providing. If I had refused these indulgences to my poor boys who are so good and work so hard, the sacrifice to honor would have been doubly painful.

“The twelve years I have spent in retirement to educate my children have left me forgotten at Court. I have given up politics; I have lost distinctions I might have bequeathed; but our house will have lost nothing; my boys will be men of mark. Though I missed the senatorship, they will win it by serving the country and rendering memorable service. While purifying the past record of my family, I have insured it a glorious future; is not that a noble task, though secret and without glory?—And now, monsieur, have you any other explanations to ask me?”

At that instant the tramp of horses was heard in the courtyard.

“Here they are!” said the Marquis. In a moment the two lads, fashionably but plainly dressed, booted and spurred, gloved, flourishing riding-whips, came in bright with health. They seized their father’s hand, gave him a look of silent affection, then bowed coldly to the lawyer. Popinot needed no questioning to perceive the quality of their relation with their father.

“Have you enjoyed yourselves?” the Marquis asked.

“Yes, father; I knocked down six dolls in twelve shots at the first trial!” cried Camille.

“And where did you ride?”

“In the Bois; we saw my mother.”

“Did she stop?”

“We were riding so fast I daresay she did not see us,” replied the young Count.

“But then why did you not go to speak to her?”

“I fancy, father, she does not care that we should speak to her in public,” Clément answered in an undertone. Popinot’s hearing caught this, and the Marquis’ brow clouded. Popinot’s heart warmed to the portrait of father and boys. The Marquis’ face and manner expressed honesty in its noblest, most chivalrous aspect.

“You—you see, monsieur,” the Marquis stammered, “Justice may look in—here at any time—yes, at any time—here. If there is anybody crazy, it can only be the children—the children—who are a little crazy about their father, and the father who is very crazy about his children—but that sort of madness rings true.”

At this instant Madame Jeanrenaud’s voice was heard in the ante-room; the good woman bustled in despite the servant’s remonstrances.

“I take no roundabout ways!” she exclaimed. “Yes, Monsieur le Marquis, I want to speak to you this very minute,” she added with a bow to the company. “By George, and I am too late as it is, since Monsieur the criminal Judge is before me.”

“Criminal!” cried the two boys.

“Good reason why I did not find you at your own house, since you are here. Well, well! the Law is always to the fore when there is mischief brewing. I came, Monsieur le Marquis, to tell you that my son and I are of one mind to give you everything back, since our honor is threatened. My son and I would rather give you back everything than cause you the smallest trouble. My word, they must be as stupid as pans without handles to call you a lunatic—”

“A lunatic! My father?” exclaimed the boys, clinging to the Marquis. “What is this?”

“Silence, madame,” said Popinot.

“Children, leave us,” said the Marquis; the boys went into the garden, much alarmed.

“Madame,” said the judge, “the moneys paid to you by Monsieur le Marquis were legally due, though given to you in virtue of a very far-reaching theory of honesty. If all people in possession of confiscated goods, however acquired, were compelled to make restitution every century and a half, there would be few legitimate owners in France. The possessions of Jacques Coeur enriched twenty noble families; confiscations by enemies made fortunes for several houses.

“Our law allows M. d’Espard to dispose of his income without accounting for it or suffering accusation of misapplication. A Commission in Lunacy can only be granted when actions are devoid of reason; but in this case the remittances to you have a reason based on the most sacred and honorable motives. Hence you may keep it all without remorse and let the world misinterpret a noble action. In Paris, the highest virtue is the object of foul calumny. It is the condition of society that makes the Marquis’ actions sublime. For the honor of my country, I would that such deeds were regarded as a matter of course; but, as things are, I am forced by comparison to look upon M. d’Espard as a man to whom a crown should be awarded rather than threatened with a Commission in Lunacy.

“In a long career, I have seen and heard nothing that touched me more deeply than what I have just seen and heard. But it is not extraordinary that virtue should wear its noblest aspect when practised by men of the highest class.

“Having expressed myself thus, I hope, Monsieur le Marquis, you feel certain of my silence and will not be uneasy as to the decision—if it comes before the Court.”

“There, now! Well said,” cried Madame Jeanrenaud. “That is something like a judge! Look here, my dear sir, I would hug you if I were not so ugly; you speak like a book.”

The Marquis held out his hand to Popinot, who pressed it gently with a look full of sympathetic comprehension, and the Marquis returned the smile. These two natures—one commonplace but divinely kind, the other lofty and sublime—had fallen into unison as though two pure lights had merged. The father of a whole district felt himself worthy to clasp the hand of this man who was doubly noble, and the Marquis felt instinctively that the judge’s hand was one from which beneficence perennially flows.

“Monsieur le Marquis,” added Popinot, bowing, “I am happy to tell you that, from the first words of this inquiry, I regarded my clerk as quite unnecessary.”

He went close to M. d’Espard, led him into the window-bay, and said: “It is time you should return home, monsieur. I believe Madame la Marquise has acted under an influence you ought at once to counteract.”

Popinot withdrew and looked back several times crossing the courtyard, touched by the scene. It was one of those impressions that take root in memory to yield consolation later.

The next day, about ten in the morning, Popinot, having written his report the previous evening, went to the Palais de Justice intending prompt action. As he went to the robing-room to put on his gown and bands, the usher told him the President of his Court begged him to attend in his private room. Popinot obeyed.

“Good-morning, my dear Popinot,” said the President. “I have been waiting for you.”

“Why, Monsieur le Président, is anything wrong?” Popinot asked.

“A mere silly trifle,” the President answered. “The Keeper of the Seals, with whom I dined yesterday, led me aside. He had heard you had been to tea with Madame d’Espard, in whose case you were employed. He suggested it would be as well that you should not sit on this case—”

“But, Monsieur le Président, I can prove I left Madame d’Espard’s house when tea was brought in. And my conscience—”

“Yes, yes; the whole Bench, the two Courts, all the profession know you. I need not repeat what I said to his Eminence; but you know, ‘Caesar’s wife must not be suspected.’ We shall not make this a matter of discipline, but only of proprieties. Between ourselves, it is not on your account, but on that of the Bench.”

“But, monsieur, if you only knew the kind of woman—” Popinot began, trying to hand over his report.

“I am perfectly certain you proceeded with strict independence. I myself, in the provinces, have often taken more than a cup of tea with the people I tried; but the Keeper mentioned it, and you might be talked about. Any conflict with public opinion is dangerous for a constitutional body, even when right is on its side, because our weapons are not equal. Journalism may say or suppose anything, and our dignity forbids reply. I have spoken of this to your President, and M. Camusot has been appointed in your place upon your retirement, which you will signify. It is a family matter, so to speak. And I beg you to signify your retirement from the case as a personal favor. To make up, you will get the Cross of the Legion of Honor, which has long been due to you. I make that my business.”

Popinot, when he saw M. Camusot—recently called to Paris from a provincial Court—could not repress an ironical smile. The pale, fair young man, full of covert ambition, looked ready to swing with the whim of any earthy King. Popinot withdrew with a bow; he scorned to deny the lying suggestion brought against him.

PARIS, February 1836.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Note: The Commission in Lunacy is also known as The Interdiction and is referred to by that title in certain of the addendums.

- Bianchon, Horace
  - Father Goriot
  - The Atheist’s Mass
  - Cesar Birotteau
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - The Secrets of a Princess
  - The Government Clerks
  - Pierrette
  - A Study of Woman
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Honorine
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - The Magic Skin
  - A Second Home
  - A Prince of Bohemia
  - Letters of Two Brides
  - The Muse of the Department
  - The Imaginary Mistress
  - The Middle Classes
  - Cousin Betty
  - The Country Parson
  In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:
  - Another Study of Woman
  - La Grande Bretèche

- Bordin
  - The Gondreville Mystery
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - Jealousies of a Country Town

- Camusot de Marville
  - Cousin Pons
  - Jealousies of a Country Town
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

- Desroches (son)
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - Colonel Chabert
  - A Start in Life
  - A Woman of Thirty
  - The Government Clerks
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - The Firm of Nucingen
  - A Man of Business
  - The Middle Classes

- Espard, Charles-Maurice-Marie-Andoche, Comte de Negrepelisse, Marquis d’
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

- Espard, Chevalier d’
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - The Secrets of a Princess

- Espard, Jeanne-Clementine-Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d’
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Letters of Two Brides
  - Another Study of Woman
  - The Gondreville Mystery
  - The Secrets of a Princess
  - A Daughter of Eve
  - Béatrix

- Godeschal, François-Claude-Marie
  - Colonel Chabert
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - A Start in Life
  - The Middle Classes
  - Cousin Pons

- Grozier, Abbé
  - Lost Illusions

- Jeanrenaud
  - Albert Savarus

- Mongenod, Frédéric
  - The Seamy Side of History

- Négrepelisse, De
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

- Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de
  - Father Goriot
  - The Thirteen
  - Eugénie Grandet
  - César Birotteau
  - Melmoth Reconciled
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Modeste Mignon
  - The Firm of Nucingen
  - Another Study of Woman
  - A Daughter of Eve
  - The Member for Arcis

- Popinot, Jean-Jules
  - César Birotteau
  - Honorine
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - The Middle Classes

- Rabourdin, Madame
  - The Government Clerks

End of Project Gutenberg’s The Commission in Lunacy, by Honoré de Balzac
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY — central divider ############# MIDDLE OF STORY.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
########### MIDDLE OF THE STORY ###########
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################