Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

BEATRIX

By Honore De Balzac

Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

NOTE

  Remarkable as it may seem, Balzac, who dealt with character and minute circumstances of life, was seldom accused of representing actual persons in the two or three thousand portraits he painted of human nature.

  In “The Great Man of the Provinces in Paris” some likenesses were imagined: Jules Janin in Etienne Lousteau, Armand Carrel in Michel Chrestien, and possibly Berryer in Daniel d’Arthez. But in this volume, “Beatrix,” he used characteristics of certain persons, recognized and admitted at the time of publication. Mademoiselle des Touches (Camille Maupin) is George Sand in character, and the personal description of her, though applied by some to the famous Mademoiselle Georges, is easily recognized from Couture’s drawing. Beatrix, Conti, and Claude Vignon sketch the Comtesse d’Agoult, Liszt, and the critic Gustave Planche.

  The opening scene, representing the manners and customs of the old Breton family and the transition of the vieille roche into present customs and ideas, is one of Balzac’s remarkable and famous pictures in the “Comedy of Human Life.”

  K.P.W.

BEATRIX

I. A BRETON TOWN AND MANSION

France, especially Brittany, still contains towns outside the movement that gives the nineteenth century its peculiar characteristics. For lack of quick, regular communication with Paris and poor roads to the arrondissement or provincial capital, these towns regard new civilization as a spectacle to be gazed at; it amazes them, but they do not embrace it. Whether they fear or scoff, they remain faithful to old manners and customs. A moral archaeologist observing men rather than stones would find images of Louis XV’s time in many a village of Provence, of Louis XIV’s in the depths of Poitou, and still older types in Brittany. Most of these towns have fallen from splendors not mentioned by historians, who care more for facts than for the truer history of manners. Tradition preserves that splendor in Brittany, where the native character forgets nothing that concerns its land. Many towns were once capitals of little feudal states—counties or duchies conquered by the crown or divided when the male line failed. Disinherited from active life, these heads became arms; arms without nourishment wither and scarcely vegetate.

For the last thirty years these pictures of ancient times have begun to fade. Modern industry, working for the masses, destroys creations of ancient art, whose works were once as personal to the consumer as to the artisan. Nowadays we have products, not works. Public buildings, monuments of the past, count in retrospection; but monuments of modern industry are freestone quarries, saltpetre mines, cotton factories. A few years more and even these old cities will be transformed and seen only in this iconography.

One of the towns preserving the feudal type most accurately is Guerande. The name awakens memories in painters, artists, and thinkers who have visited the slopes on which this splendid jewel of feudality lies posed to command the tides and dunes—the summit, as it were, of a triangle whose other corners are Croisic and the village of Batz. Few towns, except Vitre and Avignon, preserve so intact the medieval type into our epoch.

Guerande is still encircled with doughty walls; its moats are full, battlements entire, loopholes unencumbered with vegetation; even ivy has never mantled the towers. The town has three gates where rings of portcullises are seen; it is entered by an iron-clamped drawbridge, no longer raised but which could be. The mayoralty was blamed in 1820 for planting poplars along the moat to shade the promenade, excusing it by noting the fortifications’ esplanade had been converted a century earlier into a mall where inhabitants took pleasure beneath the elms.

The houses have suffered no change; none have altered their frontage, had stories added, or been plastered by an architect. Some rest on wooden columns forming arcades beneath which foot-passengers circulate, floor planks bending but never breaking. Merchant houses are small and low, their fronts veneered with slate. Decaying wood figures in carved window-casings and pillars, with grotesque faces looking down and fantastic beasts climbing the angles—relics that resist change and present dusky tones and half-blurred features painters delight in.

The streets are what they were four hundred years ago—with one exception: population no longer swarms. Social movement is so dead that a traveler may walk alone, not without sadness, through a deserted street where mullioned windows are plastered up to avoid the window-tax. This street ends at a postern flanked with a masonry wall, beyond which rises a bouquet of trees planted by Breton nature, one of the most luxuriant vegetations in France. A painter or poet might sit there silently to taste the quiet beneath the arch of the postern, where no voice comes from the city’s life and the landscape is seen through the loop-holes of the casemates once occupied by halberdiers and archers, not unlike the sashes of some belvedere arranged for a point of view.

One cannot walk through the place without thinking at every step of habits and usages of long-past times; the very stones tell of them. The ideas of the middle ages remain with their superstitions. If by chance a gendarme passes with his silver-laced hat, his presence is an anachronism; but modern objects are rare. There is little of contemporary clothing; what exists is adapted to immutable customs and unchanging physiognomies. The public square is filled with Breton costumes, which artists flock to draw; these stand out in relief on the scene. The whiteness of the linen worn by the paludiers (salt-gatherers) contrasts with the blues and browns of peasants and the sacredly preserved jewelry of the women. These classes and the sailors with jerkins and varnished leather caps are as distinct as castes and still recognize their distance from bourgeoisie, nobility, and clergy. Lines are clearly marked; the revolutionary level found the masses too rugged and hard to plane. The immutability attributed by science to zoological species is found in Breton human nature. Even after the Revolution of 1830, Guerande remained a town apart, essentially Breton, fervently Catholic, silent and self-contained—a place where modern ideas have little access.

Its geographical position explains this. The pretty town overlooks a salt-marsh producing Guerande salt, to which many Bretons attribute the excellence of their butter and sardines. It is connected to the rest of France by two roads only: one from Savenay, which stops at Saint-Nazaire; a second from Vannes connecting it with the Morbihan. The arrondissement road establishes land communication, and from Saint-Nazaire by water with Nantes. The land road is used only by government; the more frequent way is by water from Saint-Nazaire. Between this village and Guerande is eighteen miles the mail-coach does not serve; not three coach passengers a year would pass over it.

These obstacles discourage travelers. Government is slow; inhabitants readily endure difficulties that separate them from the rest of France. Guerande, at the continent’s extreme end, leads nowhere, and no one comes there. Glad to be ignored, she thinks and cares about herself. The immense product of her salt-marshes, which pays a tax of not less than a million to the Treasury, is chiefly managed at Croisic, a peninsular village communicating with Guerande over quicksands that erase tracks at night, and by boats crossing the arm of the sea that makes Croisic’s port.

This town is the Herculaneum of feudality, less its lava. It is afoot but not living; it survives because it has not been demolished. If you reach Guerande from Croisic after crossing dreary salt-marshes, you will experience a strong sensation at sight of that vast fortification. From Saint-Nazaire its picturesque position and naive grace please no less. The country about it is ravishing: hedges full of flowers, honeysuckles, roses, box, and enchanting plants. It is like an English garden designed by a great architect. This rich, coy nature, untrodden with the grace of violets or lilies in a forest glade, is framed by an African desert banked by the ocean—a desert without tree, herb, or bird; where on sunny days laboring paludiers, clothed in white and scattered among melancholy swamps, remind one of Arabs in burrows.

Thus Guerande bears no resemblance to any other place in France. The town produces upon the mind the effect of a sleeping‑draught. It is silent as Venice. There is no public conveyance beyond the springless wagon of a carrier who carries travellers, merchandise, and occasionally letters from Saint-Nazaire to Guerande and back. Bernus, the carrier, was, in 1829, the factotum of this large community. He went and came when he pleased; all the country knew him; he did errands for all. The arrival of a carriage in Guerande, that of a lady or some invalid going to Croisic for sea-bathing (thought more efficacious among those rocks than at Boulogne or Dieppe) is still an immense event. Peasants come on horseback, most with commodities for barter in sacks, induced by the need to purchase jewels distinctive of their caste which are given to Breton brides, and the white linen or cloth for their clothing.

For a circuit ten miles round, Guerande is always GUERANDE—the town where the famous treaty was signed in 1365, the key of the coast, which may boast, not less than Batz, of a splendor lost in time. The jewels, linen, cloth, ribbon, and hats are made elsewhere, but to those who buy them they are from Guerande. Artists, and even certain bourgeois, who come to Guerande feel, as at Venice, a desire (soon forgotten) to end their days amid its peace and silence, walking along the beautiful mall that surrounds the town from gate to gate toward the sea. Sometimes the image of this town rises in the temple of memory; she enters crowned with towers, clasped by her girdle; her flower-strewn robe floats, the golden mantle of her dunes enfolds her, and the fragrant breath of her briony paths exhales at every step; she fills your mind like some enchanting woman whose presence still lingers in a fold of your heart.

Near the church of Guerande stands a mansion to the town what the town is to the region—an exact image of the past, the symbol of a great thing destroyed—a poem. This mansion belongs to the noblest family of the province, the du Guaisnics, who in the days of du Guesclins were as superior in antiquity and fortune as the Trojans to the Romans. The Guaisnics (also spelled du Glaicquin), from which du Guesclin comes, are old as Brittany’s granite. They are neither Frenchmen nor Gauls—they are Bretons, Celts. Formerly they must have been Druids, gathering mistletoe in sacred forests and sacrificing men upon dolmens. Whatever their origin, today this pure race, equal to the Rohans without having made themselves princes and powerful before the ancestors of Hugues Capet, possesses two thousand francs a year, its mansion in Guerande, and the little castle of Guaisnic. All lands belonging to the barony of Guaisnic, the first in Brittany, are pledged to farmers and bring in sixty thousand francs a year despite ignorant culture. The du Guaisnics remain nominal owners although they receive none of the revenues, because for two hundred years they have been unable to pay off advances. They are in the position of the crown towards its engagistes before 1789. Where and when could the barons obtain the million their farmers advanced? Before 1789 the fiefs under Guaisnic were worth fifty thousand francs a year; but a vote of the National Assembly suppressed seigneurs’ dues on inheritance.

In such a situation this family—of no account in France and a subject of laughter in Paris—was in Guerande the whole of Brittany. In Guerande the Baron du Guaisnic is one of the great barons of France, a man above whom there is but one— the King. Today the name du Guaisnic, full of Breton significances (roots explained in “The Chouans”), has been altered as other names have been; the tax-gatherer now writes du Guenic.

At the end of a silent, damp, gloomy lane stands an arch of a gate wide enough for a man on horseback—proof that when built carriages did not exist. The arch, supported by two jambs, is of granite. The gate, of oak, rugged as bark, is studded with enormous nails in geometric figures. The semicircular arch is carved with the arms of the Guaisnics as clean-cut as though the sculptor had just laid down his chisel. This escutcheon delights lovers of heraldry by a simplicity proving the family’s pride and antiquity. It is as in crusaders’ days when Christian world invented symbols to recognize one another; the Guaisnics have never quartered it. Here, as at Guerande, it reads: Gules, a hand proper gonfaloned ermine, with a sword argent in pale, and the motto, FAC. Is not that a grand and noble thing? A baronial coronet surmounts this simple escutcheon. The artist has given some proud, chivalrous turn to the hand. With what vigor it holds the sword that recently served the family!

If you go to Guerande after reading this history you cannot fail to quiver at that blazon. Even the most confirmed republican would be moved by the fidelity, nobleness, and grandeur hidden in that dark lane. The du Guaisnics did well yesterday, and are ready to do well tomorrow. To DO is chivalry’s motto. “You did well in the battle” was the praise of the Connetable par excellence, the great du Guesclin who drove the English for a time from France. The depth of carving, protected from weather by the arch, matches the moral depth of the motto in the family’s soul. To those who know the Guaisnics this fact is touching.

The gate, when open, gives a vista into a somewhat vast courtyard, on the right the stables, on the left the kitchen and offices. The house is built of freestone from cellar to garret. The facade on the court-yard has a portico with a double range of steps, its wall covered with carved vestiges now effaced by time, but an antiquary can still make out the Hand bearing the sword in the center. Granite steps are disjointed, grasses and moss force their way through fissures, yet solidity remains. The door must have had a charming character. From remnants of the designs one can judge it was by an artist of the great Venetian school of the thirteenth century. A mixture appears of Byzantine and Saracenic. It is crowned with a circular pediment now wreathed in vegetation—a bouquet rose, brown, yellow, or blue by season. The oak, nail-studded door opens to a noble hall, at the end of which is another door opening to a portico that leads to the garden.

This hall is marvelously well preserved. Panelled wainscot three feet high is of chestnut. A magnificent Spanish leather with figures in relief, gilding now peeled or reddened, covers the walls. The ceiling is of wooden boards artistically joined and painted; the gold is faint; a few red flowers and green foliage remain. Perhaps thorough cleaning might reveal paintings like those discovered on Tristan’s house at Tours, proving the planks date or were restored in Louis XI’s reign. The chimney-piece is enormous carved stone; within are giant andirons of wrought-iron, precious workmanship. It could hold a cart-load of wood. Furniture is wholly oak, each article bearing the family arms. Three English guns fit for chase or war, three sabres, two game-bags and fishermen’s utensils hang from nails on the wall.

On one side is a dining-room connecting with the kitchen by a door cut through a corner tower. This tower corresponds on the facade toward the court-yard with another tower at the opposite corner, where a spiral staircase leads to the two upper stories.

The dining-room hangs with tapestries of the fourteenth century; the style and orthography of inscriptions on the banderols beneath each figure prove their age, but in the naive language of the fabliaux they are impossible to transcribe here. These tapestries, preserved where light has scarcely penetrated, are framed in bands of oak black as ebony. The ceiling has projecting rafters enriched with varied foliage; spaces between are planks painted blue where garlands of golden flowers twine. Two old buffers face each other; on shelves rubbed by Mariotte the cook, can be seen as in 1200, four old goblets, an ancient embossed soup-tureen, two silver salt-cellars; many pewter plates and pitchers of gray and blue pottery with arabesque designs and the du Guaisnics’ arms, covered by hinged pewter lids. The chimney-piece is modernized—its state proves the family has lived in this room for the last century. It is of carved stone in Louis XV style, ornamented with a mirror let in the back with gilt beaded moulding. This anachronism, to which the family is indifferent, would grieve a poet. On the mantel-shelf, covered with red velvet, stands a tall tortoise-shell clock inlaid with brass, flanked by silver candelabra of singular design. A large square table with solid legs fills the center; the chairs are turned wood covered with tapestry. On a round table supported by a single leg in the shape of a vine-shoot before a window into the garden is an odd lamp: a common glass globe about the size of an ostrich egg fastened to a candlestick by a glass tube; a wick issues through a hole at the top and passes through a brass reed drawing nut-oil coiled within like a tape-worm in a surgeon’s phial. Windows into the garden and court-yard are mullioned with hexagonal panes, draped by curtains with heavy valances of ancient crimson silk with gold reflections, once called brocatelle or small brocade.

Each of the two upper stories has but two rooms: the head of the family’s bedroom and the children’s. Guests lodged in chambers beneath the roof; servants above kitchens and stables. The pointed roof, protected with lead at angles and edges, has noble pointed windows on each side, one looking down on the court-yard, the other on the garden. These windows rise almost to the roof and have slender casings whose carvings have crumbled under salty vapors. Above each arch with stone crossbars grinds the vane of a noble.

Let us note a precious detail, full of naivete, valuable to an archaeologist. The spiral-stair tower is placed at the corner of a great gable wall with no window. The staircase descends to a little arched door opening on a gravelled yard between house and stables. This tower is repeated on the garden side by another of five sides ending in a cupola containing a bell-turret, instead of being roofed like the sister-tower with a pepper-pot. Architects varied symmetry of skylines thus. These towers connect on the first floor by a stone gallery supported by brackets each ending in a grotesque human head. The gallery has an exquisite balustrade. From the gable hangs a stone dais like those crowning statues of saints at church portals. Can you not see a woman walking on this balcony and gazing over Guerande at sunshine gilding the sands and shimmering on Ocean? Admire the gable wall flanked at its angles with those varied towers. The opposite gable of the Guaisnic mansion adjoins the next house. Harmony so carefully sought by architects of those days is maintained on the court-yard facade by the tower communicating between dining-room and kitchen, the same as the staircase tower except it stops at the first upper story and its summit is a small open dome beneath which stands a now blackened statue of Saint Calyste.

The garden is magnificent for so old a place. It covers half an acre, its walls espaliered, the space divided into vegetable squares bordered with cordons of fruit-trees that the man-of-all-work, Gasselin, tends between grooming horses. At the garden’s farther end is a grotto with a seat; in the middle, a sun-dial; the paths are gravelled. The garden facade has no towers corresponding to those on the court-yard; but a slender spiral column rises from ground to roof that once bore the family banner—an iron socket at its summit where a few weak plants straggle. This detail, with vestiges of sculpture, proves to a practiced eye that a Venetian architect built the mansion. The graceful staff is a signature revealing Venice, chivalry, and thirteenth-century delicacy. If any doubt remained, the ornamentation’s trefoils with four leaves instead of three would dispel it. This difference plainly indicates the Venetian school depraved by commerce with the East, where semi-Saracenic architects, careless of Catholic thought, give four leaves to clover, while Christian art is faithful to the Trinity. Here Venetian art becomes heretical.

If this ancient dwelling attracts your imagination, you may ask why such miracles are not renewed. Because today mansions are sold, pulled down, and their grounds turned into streets. No one is sure the next generation will possess the paternal dwelling; homes are no more than inns; whereas in former times when a dwelling was built, men worked, or thought they worked, for a family in perpetuity. Hence the grandeur of these houses. Faith in self, as well as faith in God, performed prodigies.

As for the arrangement of the upper rooms, they may be imagined after this ground-floor description and an account of the family’s manners, customs, and physiognomy. For the last fifty years the du Guaisnics have received friends in the two rooms described, in which, as in the court-yard and external accessories, the spirit, grace, and candor of old noble Brittany still survive. Without the town’s topography and the house’s minute depiction, the surprising figures of the family might be less understood. Therefore the frames have preceded the portraits. Everyone knows things influence beings. There are public buildings whose effect is visible upon persons living nearby. It would be difficult to be irreligious in the shadow of a cathedral like Bourges. When the soul is everywhere reminded of its destiny by surrounding images, it is less easy to fail of it. Such was our immediate grandfathers’ thought, now abandoned by a generation soon to have no signs, no distinctions, and whose manners and morals would change every decade. If you do not now expect to find the Baron du Guaisnic sword in hand, all here written would be falsehood.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Early in May 1836, when this scene opens, the family of Guenic (we adopt the modern spelling) consisted of Monsieur and Madame du Guenic, Mademoiselle du Guenic, the baron’s elder sister, and an only son, aged twenty-one, named Gaudebert-Calyste-Louis by an old family usage; the father’s name was Gaudebert-Calyste-Charles. Only the last name ever varied. Saint Gaudebert and Saint Calyste were forever bound to protect the Guenics.

The Baron du Guenic had left Guerande the moment La Vendée and Brittany rose in arms; he fought through the war with Charette, Cathelineau, La Rochejaquelein, d’Elbée, Bonchamps, and the Prince de Loudon. Prudently, before leaving, he had sold all his property to his elder sister, Mademoiselle Zéphirine du Guenic. After the death of those leaders, the baron, miraculously spared, refused to submit to Napoleon and continued to resist until 1802, when, defeated and nearly captured, he returned to Guerande, went to Croisic, and from there crossed to Ireland, faithful to the old Breton hatred for England.

The people of Guerande feigned ignorance of the baron’s existence; in twenty years not a single indiscreet word was uttered. Mademoiselle du Guenic collected the rents and sent them to her brother by fishermen. Monsieur du Guenic returned to Guerande in 1813 as quietly as if he had spent a season at Nantes. During his stay in Dublin the old Breton, well past fifty, fell in love with a charming Irishwoman, Fanny O’Brien, daughter of a noble but poor family. She was twenty-one. The baron went to France to obtain marriage papers, returned to Ireland, and about ten months later (early 1814) brought his wife to Guerande, where she gave him Calyste on the very day Louis XVIII landed at Calais—hence the young man’s final name, Louis.

The old and loyal Breton was now seventy-three; his long guerrilla warfare, exile, and perilous sea crossings had aged him prematurely, making him seem a hundred. Thus the chief of the house of Guenic fitted perfectly with the worn-out grandeur of their dwelling, built when a court still reigned at Guerande.

Monsieur du Guenic was tall, straight, wiry, and lean. His oval face was lined with innumerable wrinkles that formed a net over cheekbones and brow, resembling the faces Rembrandt and others loved to paint. His countenance seemed sunken beneath those wrinkles, produced by outdoor life and watching his country. Yet enough remained of the human face to touch the soul. The firm outline, the shape of the brow, the solemn lines, the rigid nose, the bony structure—wounded only slightly—declared intrepidity without calculation, faith without reserve, obedience without discussion, fidelity without compromise, and love without inconstancy. In him, Breton granite had become man.

The baron had no teeth; his lips, once red, were now violet and drawn inward, giving an expression both threatening and proud. His chin seemed to seek his nose, which, humped in the middle, showed his energy and Breton resistance. His skin, marbled with red blotches through the wrinkles, indicated a strongly sanguine temperament fitted to resist fatigue. His hair was abundant and white, falling in curls on his shoulders. In his black eyes, despite the extinguished face, still glittered the last flames of a generous and loyal soul. Eyebrows and lashes had disappeared; shaving had become difficult, so he let his beard grow fan-shaped. An artist would have admired his splendid hands—large, broad, hairy, the hands of a soldier and guerilla, hands that had handled sword and oar, that had fought among thorns and marshes. Looking closely one might see recent marks attesting that the Baron had again joined the Vendée. These hands were a living commentary on the Guenic motto: Fac!

His forehead showed golden temples against a hard narrow brow, broadened by hair loss, adding majesty to that noble ruin. The countenance, a little material perhaps but natural to the Breton type, presented a certain savagery and stolid calm, resembling Huguenot impassibility—a kind of repose where animal nature dominates and thought is rare. Thought seemed to be an effort; its seat was more in the heart than the head; it led to acts rather than ideas. Examined closely, the mystery resolves: he had faiths and sentiments inborn, allowing him to dispense with much thought. Institutions and religion thought for him; he reserved his mind, and his kind, for action. He drew thought from his heart like his sword from its scabbard, held aloft on his scutcheon, shining with sincerity. That explains the sale to his sister before the war—provision for all eventualities: death, confiscation, exile. The beauty of character in these two old people (for the sister lived only by and for the brother) cannot be understood by the selfish morals of the present age. An archangel could not have found one thought of personal interest. In 1814, when the rector of Guerande suggested the baron go to Paris to claim recompense from the Bourbons, the sister cried, “Oh, fy! does my brother need to hold out his hand like a beggar?” “It would be thought I served a king from interest,” said the baron. “Besides, it is for him to remember. Poor king! he must be weary indeed of those who harass him.”

This loyal servant, who had spent life and means on Louis XVIII, received the rank of colonel, the cross of Saint-Louis, and a stipend of two thousand francs a year—news the baron accepted as the king’s remembrance. No one undeceived him; the gift had been made by the Duc de Feltre. As gratitude to the king, the baron held a siege at Guerande against General Travot; refusing to surrender the fortress, he evacuated into the woods with a band of Chouans who remained armed until the second Bourbon restoration. Guerande still remembers that siege.

The Baron du Guenic was as illiterate as a peasant; he could read, write, and cipher a little, knew military art and heraldry, but, aside from his prayer-book, had not read three volumes in his life. His clothing was always the same: stout shoes, ribbed stockings, greenish velveteen breeches, a cloth waistcoat, and a loose coat with a collar from which hung the cross of Saint-Louis. A noble serenity reigned on his face; for the last year or so sleep—prelude to death—seemed preparing him for eternal rest. This somnolence did not alarm his wife, his blind sister, or his friends, whose medical knowledge was slight; to them these pauses were natural: the baron had done his duty.

In this ancient mansion the absorbing interests were the fortunes of the dispossessed elder branch, the future of the exiled Bourbons, the Catholic religion, and political innovations in Brittany. The one personal interest was the attachment of all for the only son, Calyste, heir and sole hope of the du Guenic name.

Some years earlier the old Vendean had a return of youth to train his son in manly exercises proper for a gentleman ready at any moment to take arms. When Calyste was sixteen, his father took him to the marshes and forest, teaching war’s rudiments through chase, preaching by example, firm in saddle and sure in shot, indifferent to fatigue, intrepid before obstacles, bidding his son follow him into danger.

So, when the Duchesse de Berry landed to attempt restoration for her son, the father judged it right to take his boy and join her, practicing the family motto. The baron started at night, saying nothing to his wife, taking his son under fire as if to a fête, accompanied by Gasselin, his sole vassal. The three were absent three months without sending news to the baroness, who read the Quotidienne with trembling, nor to the blind sister, whose nerve never faltered. The three guns on the walls had seen service recently. The baron, considering the enterprise useless, left the region before the affair of La Pénissière; otherwise the house of Guenic might have ended in hecatomb.

On a stormy night after parting from Madame, the father, son, and servant returned, surprising the baroness and Mademoiselle du Guenic, though the blind sister recognized their steps in the lane. The baron looked around the anxious circle seated by the antique lamp and said in a tremulous voice, while Gasselin replaced guns and sabres, in words of feudal simplicity: “The barons did not all do their duty.” Then he kissed his wife and sister, sat in his old arm-chair, and ordered supper for his son, Gasselin, and himself. Gasselin had thrown himself before Calyste to protect him and received a sabre cut on his shoulder; the women scarcely thanked him. The baron and guests uttered neither curses nor complaints about conquerors—silence a Breton trait. In forty years no one ever heard contumely from the baron about his adversaries; it was for them to do their duty as he did his. This silence indicates an unalterable will.

This last effort, a flash of waning energy, had caused the present weakness and somnolence of the old man. The fresh defeat and exile of the Bourbons, driven out as miraculously as restored, were a bitter sadness.

About six on the evening this history begins, the baron, who by custom dined at four, fell asleep while his wife read the Quotidienne. His head rested against the arm-chair back beside the fireplace on the garden side.

Near that gnarled ancient tree, and before the fire, the baroness sat, the type of those admirable women found most in England, Scotland, or Ireland—milk-white, golden-haired, the curls wound as if by angels, with a heavenly light in their hair. Fanny O’Brien was one of those sylphs—strong in tenderness, invincible under misfortune, soft as her voice, pure as her blue eyes; skin silken to the touch, beauty beyond painter or word. Still beautiful at forty-two, many would have counted themselves fortunate to marry her as she looked on the autumn display of flowers and fruit.

The baroness held the paper in dimpled fingers, nails cut square like an antique statue’s. Half reclining, feet out to warm, she wore a black velvet gown for the chill. The corsage rose to the throat and molded the shoulders and bosom undistorted by motherhood. Her hair was in ringlets in the English fashion, the rest twisted to the crown and pinned with a tortoiseshell comb. The color, not undecided like other blondes, gleamed like burnished gold. She braided the short nape-locks—a racial sign—concealing the tiny braid in the coif, a detail showing the care she gave her person; it was her pride to please the old baron. When a woman displays in her own home the coquetry many reserve for outside, she is a noble mother and wife; she loves without calculation, does good in secret, and worships. In Fanny the Virgin’s halo seemed to preserve her beauty from time. Her skin had taken warm pearly tones; her brow, broad and well-modeled, caught the light; turquoise eyes shone with incomparable sweetness; soft lashes and slightly sunken temples inspired mute melancholy. Her aquiline thin nose suggested high birth; pure lips wore happy smiles of inexhaustible loving-kindness. Her teeth were small and white; she had gained a slight embonpoint lately, but hips and slender waist remained pleasing. Autumn added perennial flowers to her summer beauty—nobler rounded arms, finer skin grain, fuller outlines. Above all, her open serene face and pure blue eyes expressed illimitable sympathy and angelic tenderness.

At the other hearth, in an arm-chair, the octogenarian sister, like her brother in all except dress, sat listening and knitting stockings—the work requiring no sight. Both eyes had cataracts; she refused an operation despite her sister-in-law’s entreaties. Secretly, she said it was want of courage; truly, she would not let her brother spend twenty-five louis for her. That sum saved would be for the household’s good.

These two old persons set off the baroness’ beauty. Mademoiselle Zéphirine, deprived of sight, was unaware of what eighty years had done to her face. Her pale hollow countenance, the white sightless eyes giving an appearance of death, and three or four solitary projecting teeth, framed by a little brown printed cotton hood quilted like a petticoat and trimmed with a ruche, seemed menacing. She wore a cotillon—short coarse skirt—over a quilted petticoat (a veritable mattress hiding double louis-d’or) and pockets sewn to a belt she unfastened each night and put on each morning like a garment. Her body was encased in the casaquin of Brittany, a spencer of the same cloth, with a pleated collar, the washing of which caused her only dispute with her sister-in-law—she changed it only once a week. From the large wadded sleeves came two withered yet vigorous arms, their brownish-red hands like stocking-machines eternally at work; from time to time she would thrust a long knitting needle between hood and hair to poke her white locks, thrusting it back carelessly without fear of harm. She was straight as a steeple; her erect and imposing carriage might be one of old age’s coquetries proving pride a necessary passion of life. Her smile was gay. She, too, had done her duty.

As soon as the baroness saw her husband asleep, she ceased reading. A ray of sunshine stretched across the old room, burnishing black furniture, touching ceiling carvings, dancing on time-worn chests, and brightening the old oak table; Fanny’s voice and the light made music in the octogenarian blind sister’s heart. The ray sank into the melancholy tones of twilight; the baroness fell into deep meditation, a silence noted by her sister-in-law for the last two weeks, unexplained and unasked about. Mademoiselle continued to knit; the silence deepened until the clicking of needles was plainly heard.

“You have dropped the paper, sister, but you are not asleep,” said Mademoiselle slyly.

Mariotte then entered to light the lamp, which she placed on a small table by the fire, fetched her distaff and ball of thread, and sat on a stool in the window recess to spin. Gasselin busied himself about the offices, saw to the horses, readied the stable, and fed the two hunting-dogs; their joyful barking was the last noise to awaken the echoes in the dark walls. The two dogs and two horses were the only remaining vestiges of the house’s chivalry. An imaginative man sitting on the portico steps might have quivered to the hounds’ baying and the horses’ neighing.

Gasselin was a short, thick, squat Breton, with black hair and sun-browned face, silent, slow, and obstinate as a mule, yet steady. He was forty-two and had been in the household twenty-five years, hired by Mademoiselle at fifteen on hearing of the marriage and the baron’s probable return. He considered himself part of the family, had played with Calyste, loved the horses and dogs, petted them, and wore a blue linen jacket with flapping pockets, matching waistcoat and trousers, blue stockings, and stout hob-nailed shoes; in cold he donned a goatskin.

Mariotte, also over forty, was to woman what Gasselin was to man—same complexion, figure, lively black eyes. It is curious they never married; perhaps it seemed immoral, they were so like brother and sister. Mariotte’s wages were ninety francs a year; Gasselin’s, three hundred. But thousands elsewhere would not have tempted either to leave the Guenic household. Both were under Mademoiselle’s orders, who, from the war to the baron’s return, had ruled the house. When she learned the baron would bring home a mistress, she feared losing the household sceptre, yet she was agreeably surprised to find in Fanny O’Brien a woman of high birth who disliked petty household cares and would prefer plain fare to preparing costly food for herself. Fanny was capable of all duties, strong under necessary privations but without taste for commonplace work. When the baron begged his sister, in his wife’s name, to continue in charge, the old maid kissed the baroness like a sister, made a daughter of her, adored her, and rejoiced to keep control of household management. She ran the house on an almost inconceivable economy, relaxing only for great occasions—lying-in, Calyste’s needs, and similar events.

Though the two servants were used to the stern regime and required no orders—masters’ interests were their own—Mademoiselle insisted on overseeing everything. She knew, without looking, how many nuts in the barn or oats in the bin, carrying on her belt a boatswain’s whistle to summon Mariotte with one note and Gasselin with two.

Gasselin’s greatest happiness was tending the garden, producing fine fruits and vegetables; with so little to do he would have been lost without it. After grooming horses and cleaning the ground-floor rooms, he weeded and watched for a field-mouse or the grub of the cockchafer, joyfully presenting his catch to his masters. He liked going to Croisic on fast-days to buy fish cheaper than at Guerande.

Thus no household was more united in interests, more bound together than this noble family devoted to duty. Masters and servants seemed made for one another. For twenty-five years there had been neither trouble nor discord. The only griefs were the boy’s petty ailments, the only terrors the events of 1814 and 1830. If the same tasks were performed at the same hours, and food obeyed seasons and times, this monotony, like nature’s, varied only by cloud and sun, and was sustained by affection in all hearts—the more fruitful because it sprang from natural causes.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
When night had fairly fallen, Gasselin entered the hall and asked his master respectfully if he was still needed.

“You can go out, or go to bed, after prayers,” replied the baron, waking, “unless Madame or my sister—”

The two ladies signaled assent. Gasselin knelt as his masters rose to kneel on their chairs; Mariotte also knelt before her stool. Mademoiselle du Guenic then said the prayer aloud. After it was over, someone rapped at the door on the lane and Gasselin opened it.

“I dare say it is Monsieur le cure; he usually comes first,” said Mariotte.

Everyone recognized the rector’s foot on the portico steps. He bowed respectfully to the three occupants and addressed them with the unctuous civility of a priest. To the somewhat absent-minded greeting of the mistress of the house he replied with ecclesiastical inquiry.

“Are you anxious or ill, Madame la baronne?” he asked.

“Thank you, no,” she replied.

Monsieur Grimont, about fifty, of middle height, lost in his cassock from which issued two stout shoes, showed a plump visage and generally pale skin with yellow spots. His dimpled hands and placid abbatial face suggested a Dutch burgomaster; his straight black hair and lively brown eyes recalled a Breton peasant. His gaiety, that of a man whose conscience is calm, admitted a joke. He lacked the unease of rectors whose power is contested; seen through Guerande, even the most irreligious traveler would recognize him as the sovereign of that Catholic town. Yet before the du Guenics he lowered his spiritual superiority; in their salon he was a chaplain in his seigneur’s house. In church his benediction always favored the Guenic chapel, where their mailed hand and device adorned the keystone.

“I thought Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel had already arrived,” said the rector, sitting and taking the baroness’s hand to kiss it. “She is getting unpunctual. Can it be that dissipation is contagious? I see Monsieur le chevalier is again at Les Touches this evening.”

“Don’t say anything about those visits before Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel,” cried the old maid eagerly.

“Ah! mademoiselle,” remarked Mariotte, “you can’t prevent the town from gossiping.”

“What do they say?” asked the baroness.

“The young girls and the old women all say he is in love with Mademoiselle des Touches.”

“A lad of Calyste’s make is playing his proper part in making the women love him,” said the baron.

“Here comes Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel,” said Mariotte.

The gravel in the courtyard crackled under discreet footsteps; a page with a lantern accompanied the coming lady. Seeing him, Mariotte moved her stool to the great hall to talk with him by the lantern’s gleam, economizing the hall’s single oribus candle.

This elderly demoiselle was thin, dried-up, yellow as parchment, wrinkled, with gray eyes, prominent teeth, and the hands of a man. Short, slightly crooked, possibly hump-backed, she stirred a great mass of petticoats when reaching a pocket; a loud jingling of keys and money echoed among her garments. She wore, dangling from one side, the keys of a good housekeeper, and from the other a silver snuff-box, thimble, knitting-needles, and other resonant implements. Instead of Zephirine’s wadded hood she had a green bonnet—once fresh, now yellowing—of a fashion preserved by her nieces and renewed every five years at Nantes. Her gowns, too, were made by her nieces to an immutable pattern. She used the old cane with its short hook and bore the ermine of ancient Breton dukes. In her and her sister the illustrious house of the Pen-Hoels ended. Her younger sister had married a Kergarouet who, despite disapproval, added Pen-Hoel to his name and called himself Vicomte de Kergarouet-Pen-Hoel.

“Heaven has punished him,” said the old lady; “he has nothing but daughters, and the Kergarouet-Pen-Hoel name will be wiped out.”

Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel had about seven thousand francs a year from rents. She had come into her property at thirty-six and managed it herself, inspecting it on horseback and displaying the firmness often seen in deformed persons. Her avarice was admired locally; she kept one woman-servant and the page, and her yearly expenses, excluding taxes, did not exceed a thousand francs. Thus she attracted the caresses of the Kergarouet-Pen-Hoels, who spent winters at Nantes and summers on the Loire estate. She was supposed ready to leave her fortune to whichever niece pleased her best; every three months one of the four demoiselles de Kergarouet-Pen-Hoel (the youngest twelve, the eldest twenty) came to spend a few days with her.

A friend of Zephirine du Guenic, Jacqueline de Pen-Hoel, devoted to the Breton grandeur of the du Guenics, had planned since Calyste’s birth to transmit her property to the chevalier by marrying him to whichever niece the Vicomtesse de Kergarouet-Pen-Hoel would bestow. She dreamed of buying back some of the best Guenic property from the farmer engagistes. When avarice has an object it ceases to be a vice; it becomes a means of virtue. Perhaps Zephirine knew Jacqueline’s plan. Perhaps even the baroness, whose soul was occupied by love for her son and tenderness for his father, guessed it, seeing with what wily perseverance Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel brought her favorite niece, Charlotte de Kergarouet, now sixteen. The rector, Monsieur Grimont, was certainly in her confidence; he helped the old maid invest her savings.

But even had Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel possessed three hundred thousand francs in gold, the du Guenics would never have shown any attention that could be construed as seeking her fortune. From true Breton pride, Jacqueline, glad of the supremacy accorded to Zephirine and the du Guenics, always showed herself honored by her relations with Madame du Guenic and her sister-in-law. She even concealed the sacrifice she made each evening in allowing her page to burn in the Guenic hall that singular gingerbread-colored candle called an oribus still used in western France.

Thus this rich old maid was nobility, pride, and grandeur personified. At the moment of this narrative, the Abbe Grimont has revealed that on the evening when the old baron, the young chevalier, and Gasselin secretly departed to join MADAME (to the terror of the baroness and the great joy of all Bretons) Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel had given the baron ten thousand francs in gold—an immense sacrifice—to which the abbe added another ten thousand, a tithe collected by him—charging the old hero to offer the whole, in the name of the Pen-Hoels and of the parish of Guerande, to the mother of Henri V.

Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel treated Calyste as if her intentions gave her rights over him; her plans seemed to authorize supervision. Not strict in gallantry—she had the indulgence of old women of the old school—she held in horror modern ways. Calyste might increase her esteem by a few Breton adventures but would lose it considerably if she saw him entangled in what she called innovations. She might disinter a little gold to pay for the results of a love-affair, but if Calyste drove a tilbury or spoke of a visit to Paris she would deem him dissipated and a spendthrift. To her, novel ideas meant the overthrow of crop succession, ruin under the name of improvements, mortgaged lands as the inevitable result of experiments. Prudence was the true method of making fortune; good management meant filling granaries and waiting for a rise rather than risking experiments. By singular chance she often made lucky sales that confirmed her principles. She was thought maliciously clever but was not quick-witted; methodical as a Dutchman, prudent as a cat, and persistent as a priest, those qualities in routine-bound Brittany were practically equivalent to intellect.

“Will Monsieur du Halga join us this evening?” asked Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel, taking off her knitted mittens after the usual exchange of greetings.

“Yes, mademoiselle; I met him taking his dog to walk on the mall,” replied the rector.

“Ha! then our mouche will be lively to-night. Last evening we were only four.”

At the word mouche the rector rose and took from a drawer a small round osier basket, a pile of ivory counters yellow with use, and a greasy pack of cards. He arranged counters before each player and set the basket beside the lamp with infantine eagerness and the manner of a man accustomed to this service.

A firm knock at the outer gate echoed through the mansion. The page opened, and presently the long, lean, methodically clothed Chevalier du Halga, former flag-captain to Admiral de Kergarouet, outlined himself in black on the portico.

“Welcome, chevalier!” cried Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel.

“The altar is raised,” said the abbe.

The chevalier was a man in poor health, who wore flannel for his rheumatism, a black-silk skull-cap to protect his head from fog, and a spencer to guard his chest from sudden gusts. He always carried a gold-headed cane and a little bitch named Thisbe. Fussy as a fine lady and speaking low to spare his voice, he had in earlier days been among the most intrepid officers of the old navy, winning the confidence of de Suffren and the friendship of the Comte de Portenduere. His splendid conduct as flag-captain to Admiral Kergarouet was written on his scarred face. Now no one would imagine the voice that ruled storms and the eye that compassed the sea.

The chevalier never smoked, never swore; he was gentle and tranquil as a girl, as concerned about Thisbe’s caprices as an elderly dowager. He moved as an invalid, walking as if stepping on eggs, complaining of wind, sun, or mist, yet showed the whitest teeth in the reddest gums—a fact reassuring as to his maladies, which were rather expensive, consisting of four daily meals of monastic amplitude. His frame, like the baron’s, was bony and indestructibly strong, covered with a parchment-like skin retaining the tawny color from India, whence, however, he did not bring back facts or ideas. He had emigrated with his friends, lost his property, and now ended his days with the cross of Saint-Louis and a pension of two thousand francs from the Invalides de la Marine. The slight hypochondria that made him invent imaginary ills is explained by actual suffering during the emigration. He served in the Russian navy until Emperor Alexander ordered him employed against France; he then resigned and lived at Odessa near the Duc de Richelieu, with whom he returned to France. The duke obtained for this relic of the old Breton navy the pension that enabled him to live. On the death of Louis XVIII he returned to Guerande and eventually became mayor of the city.

For the last fifteen years the rector, the chevalier, and Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel had regularly passed their evenings at the hotel de Guenic, where other noble neighbors also came. It will be readily understood that the du Guenics were at the head of the faubourg Saint-Germain of the old Breton province, where no member of the new administration sent down by the government was ever allowed to penetrate. For the last six years the rector coughed when coming to the crucial words, Domine, salvum fac regem. Politics in Guerande remained at that point.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
IV. A NORMAL EVENING

Mouche is played with five cards to each player and one turned up to show trumps. Each round a player may play or abstain; abstaining costs only his stake unless there are forfeits in the basket. If he plays and wins a trick he is paid pro rata to the stake; win none and he is mouche, paying the whole stake and swelling the next basket. Those who decline throw down their cards; their play is null. Players may exchange cards with the remainder of the pack in sequence, so the first two sometimes take most of it. The turned-up trump belongs to the dealer, who is last and may exchange it for any card in his hand. One powerful card, the knave of clubs, is called Mistigris.

The game provokes cupidity, diplomacy, and poker faces. At the hotel du Guenic each player took twenty counters representing five sous, making the stake five farthings—a significant sum for this company. In extraordinary luck fifty sous could be won—more than anyone in Guerande spent in a day. Consequently Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel played mouche with the passion of a big-game hunter. Mademoiselle Zephirine, who shared with the baroness, attached equal importance, treating one farthing for a chance at five as a serious investment.

An 1825 convention stated the game should cease when anyone losing ten sous wished to retire; politeness forbade continuing without him. The chevalier and the baron, however, found a way around this: when all but one wished to continue, du Halga, a rich free-spending sailor, would offer ten counters to Zephirine or Jacqueline, recompensing them if they won. The baron made similar offers under the pretext of continuing the game. The misers accepted, though not without pressing—a maidens' custom—but only after the baron and chevalier had won, or the offer would insult them.

Mouche became brilliant when a Demoiselle de Kergarouet passed through with her aunt. The Kergarouets insisted on being called simply Kergarouet. The aunt treated the niece to mouche at du Guenic and ordered her to look amiable—easy in Calyste’s presence, whom the four Kergarouet girls adored. Brought up in modern ways, they cared little for five sous; stakes rose. These evenings excited the old blind sister, who signaled stakes to the baroness by pressing her foot a number of times. To play or not when the basket was full provoked inward struggle—cupidity versus fear. If Charlotte de Kergarouet was lucky, her aunt would nevertheless lecture her on reserve and modesty for appearing too decisive.

These nightly games, carried on for twenty years, were sometimes interrupted by gossip or political discussion. Players often sat half an hour talking with cards fanned on their stomachs. If a counter was missing from the basket, everyone declared they had put in their share. Usually the chevalier made up the deficiency and was accused of being absent-minded about his health; when he paid, Zephirine and Jacqueline fretted they themselves might have forgotten. The company enjoyed the small suspicions. Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel would almost always accuse the rector of cheating when he won the basket.

“It is singular,” he replied, “that I never cheat except when I win the trick.”

Sometimes talk of royal misfortunes would distract the baron, and evenings could end without gain or loss but with emotion and complaints that mouche was dull. Once, after the Kergarouets arrived, they tried whist and boston at the baroness’s urging but could not understand them; on departure the new games were voted head-splitters and the company returned to mouche—tradition triumphing in Brittany.

While the rector dealt, the baroness asked the Chevalier du Halga the same health questions as the night before. The chevalier made it a point to invent new ailments; he never complained of real wounds but of fancied pains—the doctors have found no remedy for illnesses that don't exist. “Yesterday the trouble was, I believe, in your legs,” said the rector. “It moves about,” said the chevalier. The exchange, with light banter from Zephirine and Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel, displayed the chevalier’s old wit and a life rich in memories.

The conversation turned to the death of the Duc de Lenoncourt, and the baron remarked he would be next; his wife gently rebuked him. The company noticed the baron’s melancholy and afterward would say, “Monsieur du Guenic was sad to-night.” The phrase “The Baron du Guenic fails” opened many conversations.

“How is Thisbe?” asked Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel. “The poor thing is like her master,” the chevalier replied, mimicking the dog and exposing his hand—an attempt by a neighbor to see if he had Mistigris or the trump. The baroness observed the rector’s nose grow pale—his sign of holding Mistigris—because of the pleasure that card gave him.

“You had company today,” said the chevalier. “Yes, a cousin of my brother-in-law,” she replied; she told of the marriage of the Comtesse de Kergarouet, a Demoiselle de Fontaine. The chevalier, who knew the admiral, recognized the name. She then astonished them with tales about Mademoiselle des Touches—so strange she could hardly believe them; if true, Calyste would not be so constantly with her. The baron pricked up his ears.

But Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel suddenly had Mistigris and could not continue. “Your play, monsieur le baron,” she said. Zephirine returned to knitting; the rector, informed about Calyste and Mademoiselle des Touches, refrained. The baron inquired again: “What is so extraordinary?” “She smokes,” Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel said. The chevalier commented dryly. Asked about her property, the old maid said she was squandering it.

“The game is mine!” cried the baroness; she had a long run of trumps and Mistigris. The victory horrified Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel, who forgot Calyste and Mademoiselle des Touches for a moment. By nine only the baroness and rector remained; the others had gone to bed. The chevalier, as usual, accompanied Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel home, commenting on Zephirine’s delight in engulfing her gains. He had also noticed the baroness’ abstraction.

At Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel’s door she confided the cause: “Calyste is lost unless we marry him promptly. He loves Mademoiselle des Touches, an actress!” “Then send for Charlotte.” “I have; my sister will receive my letter tomorrow,” she replied.

From this sketch of a normal evening one may imagine the hubbub excited throughout Guerande by any stranger’s arrival, stay, or passage.

When silence came from the baron’s and his sister’s rooms, the baroness looked at the rector, who toyed pensively with the counters. “I see that you begin to share my anxiety about Calyste,” she said. “Did you notice Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel’s displeased looks to-night?” he asked. She had the best intentions for Calyste; she loved him as though he were her son. His conduct in the Vendée beside his father and Madame's praises of his devotion had increased that affection. Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel intends to execute a deed of gift leaving her property to whichever niece Calyste marries. The rector acknowledged the mother’s hope for a richer Irish match but said it was wise to have two strings to the bow—Pen-Hoel’s savings and well-managed land were not to be despised. He then described Mademoiselle des Touches’ life: a stage-woman and writer, frequenter of theatres and artists, squandering her fortune on pamphleteers, painters, and musicians, under the false name Camille Maupin. She had turned Les Touches into an improper paradise of dissipation; more wine was drunk there in weeks than in all Guerande in a year. Last year the Demoiselles Bougniol let lodgings to men suspected of being Blues; they sang wicked songs and spent time at Les Touches. And this is whom Calyste adores; he would gallop to Nantes for an infamous book but not for the Church. She is not a royalist; if Calyste were called to fight for the cause and she wanted to keep him, the chevalier might let his own father go without him.

“Oh, no!” exclaimed the baroness. The rector feared to test Calyste; the mother would suffer too much. “I will see Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel tomorrow,” he promised. “Don’t be too uneasy. The harm may not be as great as they say. I will find out the truth. Jacqueline trusts me. Calyste is our child and pupil—he will not let the devil inveigle him nor disturb his family’s plans. One fault is not vice.”

“You are only informing me of details,” said the baroness. “Was I not the first to notice the change in my Calyste? A mother keenly feels being second in her son’s heart. This crisis is a trial of motherhood. I had hoped Calyste would love someone noble and beautiful—not a stage-player, a masquerader, an author who feigns sentiments, a creature who will deceive and make him unhappy! She has had adventures—”

“With several men,” said the rector. “Yet this impious creature was born in Brittany! She dishonors her land. I shall preach upon her next Sunday.”

“Don’t do that!” cried the baroness. “The peasants and paludiers might rush to Les Touches. Calyste is Breton; something dreadful might happen if he defended her as he would the Blessed Virgin.”

“It is now ten o’clock; I must bid you good-night,” said the abbe, lighting his lantern. “Who could have told me that a young man brought up by you, trained by me to Christian ideas, a fervent Catholic, a child who has lived like a spotless lamb, would plunge into such mire?”

“But is it certain?” asked the mother. “How could any woman help loving Calyste?”

“What proof other than her staying on at Les Touches? In twenty-four years since coming of age she has never stayed so long; her visits were formerly few and short.”

“A woman over forty!” exclaimed the baroness. “In Ireland they say such a woman is the most dangerous mistress for a young man.”

“As to that I have no knowledge,” replied the rector, “and shall die in ignorance.”

“And I, too, alas!” said the baroness. “I wish I had loved deeply, so I might counsel and comfort Calyste.”

The rector did not cross the little court-yard alone; the baroness accompanied him to the gate, hoping to hear Calyste’s step. They heard the rector’s cautious tread grow fainter and the parsonage door close behind him.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
V. CALYSTE

The poor mother returned to the salon deeply distressed to find that
the whole town was aware of what she had thought known to her alone.
She sat down, trimmed the wick of the lamp with old scissors, took up
her worsted-work, and awaited Calyste. The baroness hoped to induce her
son to come home earlier and spend less time with Mademoiselle des
Touches. Such maternal calculations were vain. Day after day, Calyste’s
visits to Les Touches became more frequent, and every night he came in
later. The night before the day of which we speak it was midnight when he
returned.

The baroness, lost in maternal meditation, set her stitches with the
rapidity of one absorbed in thought while engaged in manual labor.
Whoever had seen her bending to the lamp beneath the centennial hangings
would have admired the sublimity of the picture. Fanny’s skin was so
transparent one read the thoughts that crossed her brow. Piqued with a
curiosity that often comes to a pure woman, she asked what devilish
secrets these daughters of Baal possessed to charm men so as to make
them forget mother, family, country, and self-interest. Sometimes she
longed to meet this woman and judge her soberly. Her mind measured the
evils the innovative spirit of the age—described to her as so dangerous
for young souls by the rector—would have upon her only child, until
then so guileless; as pure as an innocent girl, and beautiful with the
same fresh beauty.

Calyste, that splendid offspring of the oldest Breton race and the
noblest Irish blood, had been nurtured by his mother with the utmost
care. Until she left his training to the rector of Guerande, she was
certain no impure word or evil thought had sullied her precious son.
After nursing him at her bosom, giving him her life twice, as it were,
and guiding his footsteps as a child, she entrusted him, still innocent,
to the pastor, who, out of reverence for the family, promised a thorough
Christian education. Calyste thenceforth received the instruction the
abbé himself had had at the Seminary. The baroness taught him English,
and a teacher of mathematics was found among the employees at
Saint-Nazaire. Calyste was thus ignorant of modern literature and the
current advance of the sciences. His education had been limited to
geography, circumspect history, the Latin and Greek of seminaries, the
literature of dead languages, and a restricted choice of French writers.
When, at sixteen, he began what the Abbé Grimont called his philosophy,
he was essentially the same as when Fanny placed him in the abbé’s
hands. The Church had proved as maternal as the mother. Without being
over-pious or ridiculous, the idolized young lad was a fervent Catholic.

For this noble, innocent son the baroness desired a quiet happy life.
She expected to inherit some property, two or three thousand pounds
sterling, from an aunt. This sum, joined to the small present fortune of
the Guenics, might enable her to find a wife for Calyste who would bring
twelve or fifteen thousand francs a year. Charlotte de Kergarouet, with
her aunt’s fortune, a rich Irish girl, or any other good heiress would
have suited the baroness, who seemed indifferent as to choice. She was
ignorant of love, having never known it, and like those about her saw
marriage only as a means of fortune. Passion was unknown to these
Catholic souls, these old people exclusively concerned with salvation,
God, the king, and property. No one should be surprised, therefore, at
the foreboding thoughts that accompanied the mother’s wounded feelings,
who lived as much for her son’s future interests as for her love. If
the household would listen to wisdom, she thought, the coming Guenic
generation, by enduring privations and saving as provincials do, would
buy back their estates and recover wealth. The baroness prayed for a
long life to see this dawn. Mademoiselle du Guenic shared this hope,
which Mademoiselle des Touches now threatened.

The baroness heard midnight strike with tears; the clock struck one, and
Calyste was still not home.

“Will he stay there?” she thought. “It would be the first time. Poor
child!”

At that moment Calyste’s step resounded in the lane. Joy drove out
anxiety; the poor mother flew to the gate and opened it.

“Oh!” cried Calyste, in a grieved voice, “my darling mother, why did you
sit up for me? I have a pass-key and the tinder-box.”

“You know very well, my child, that I cannot sleep when you are out,”
she said, kissing him.

In the salon she looked at her son to discover, if possible, from his
expression the events of the evening. But he caused her, as usual, an
emotion that frequency never weakened—a feeling all loving mothers have
at sight of a masterpiece they made. Except for the black eyes, full of
energy and sun-heat which he took from his father, Calyste otherwise
resembling his mother; he had her golden hair, lovable mouth, curving
fingers, and soft white skin. Though slightly resembling a girl
disguised as a man, his physical strength was Herculean. Muscles had
the suppleness and vigor of steel springs; the singularity of his black
eyes and fair complexion was charming. His beard had not yet sprouted;
this delay is said to promise longevity. The chevalier wore a short
black velvet coat like his mother’s gown, silver buttons, a blue foulard
necktie, gray jean trousers, and gaiters. His white brow bore signs of
fatigue caused, to an observer, by painful thoughts; but his mother,
unable to suppose troubles could wring his heart, attributed weariness
to passing excitement. Calyste was handsome as a Greek god and without
conceit; he had his mother’s beauty constantly before him and cared
little for personal advantages he found useless.

“Those beautiful pure cheeks,” thought his mother, “where young blood
flows, belong to another woman! She is the mistress of that innocent
brow! Ah! passion will lead to many evils; it will tarnish those eyes,
moist as an infant’s!”

This bitter thought wrung Fanny’s heart and destroyed her pleasure.

It may seem strange that in a family of six living on three thousand
francs a year the son should have a coat and the mother a gown of
velvet; but Fanny O’Brien had aunts and wealthy relations in London who
remembered her with gifts. Several sisters, married to wealth, took
interest in Calyste, wishing to find him an heiress, knowing he was
noble and handsome.

“You stayed at Les Touches longer than last night, my dear one,” said
the mother at last, in an agitated tone.

“Yes, dear mother,” he answered, offering no explanation.

The curtness of this answer clouded her brow; she postponed the
explanation till the morrow. Mothers who admit such anxieties tremble
before their sons; they perceive what love is about to take from them,
but they feel joy in their sons’ happiness. Conflicting feelings battled
in their hearts. Though the result may be their sons’ superior growth,
true mothers dislike forced abdication; they would rather keep their
children small and needing protection.

“You are tired, dear child; go to bed,” she said, repressing her tears.

A mother ignorant of all her son’s doings thinks the worst—that is, if
the mother loves as Fanny did. The patient care of twenty years might be
ruined. This human masterpiece of virtuous and religious education might
be destroyed; the happiness prepared for his life might be ruined by
this woman.

The next day Calyste slept till mid-day; his mother would not have him
wakened. Mariotte served breakfast in his bed. The inflexible
semi-conventual rules regulating meal hours yielded to the chevalier’s
caprices. If it became necessary to borrow a key from Mademoiselle du
Guenic to obtain food outside meal hours, it was done by pretext of a
fancy of Calyste.

About one o’clock the baron, his wife, and Mademoiselle sat in the
salon, for they dined at three. The baroness read the Quotidienne to her
husband. As she finished a paragraph she heard Calyste’s steps on the
upper floor and dropped the paper.

“Calyste must be going to dine again at Les Touches; he has dressed
himself.”

“He amuses himself, the dear boy,” said the old sister, taking a
silver whistle from her pocket and whistling once.

Mariotte appeared at the communicating door.

“What is it?” she said; “anything wanted?”

“The chevalier dines at Les Touches; don’t cook the fish.”

“But we are not sure as yet,” said the baroness.

“You seem annoyed, sister; I know it by your voice.”

“Monsieur Grimont has heard grave charges against Mademoiselle des
Touches, who for the last year has so changed our dear Calyste.”

“Changed him, how?” asked the baron.

“He reads all sorts of books.”

“Ah! ah!” exclaimed the baron, “so that’s why he has given up hunting
and riding.”

“Her morals are very reprehensible, and she has taken a man’s name,”
added Madame du Guenic.

“A war name, I suppose,” said the old man. “I was called ‘l’Intime,’ the
Comte de Fontaine ‘Grand-Jacques,’ the Marquis de Montauran the ‘Gars.’
I was the friend of Ferdinand, who never submitted, any more than I did.
Ah! those were the good times; people shot each other, but what of that?
we amused ourselves.”

This war memory, pushing aside paternal anxiety, saddened Fanny for a
moment. The rector’s revelations and Calyste’s want of confidence had
kept her from sleeping.

“Suppose Monsieur le chevalier does love Mademoiselle des Touches,
where’s the harm?” said Mariotte. “She has thirty thousand francs a year
and she is very handsome.”

“What is that you say, Mariotte?” exclaimed the old baron. “A Guenic
marry a des Touches! The des Touches were not even grooms in the days
when du Guesclin considered our alliance an honor.”

“A woman who takes a man’s name—Camille Maupin!” said the baroness.

“The Maupins are an old family,” said the baron; “they bear: gules,
three—” He stopped. “But she cannot be a Maupin and a des Touches both,”
he added.

“She is called Maupin on the stage.”

“A des Touches could hardly be an actress,” said the old man. “Really,
Fanny, if I did not know you, I should think you out of your head.”

“She writes plays and books,” continued the baroness.

“Books?” said the baron, looking surprised. “I have heard that
Mademoiselle Scudery and Madame de Sévigné wrote books, but it was not
the best thing they did.”

“Are you going to dine at Les Touches, monsieur?” said Mariotte, when
Calyste entered.

“Probably,” replied the young man.

Mariotte, not inquisitive, left without waiting to hear what the
baroness would say to her son.

“Are you going again to Les Touches, my Calyste?” The baroness
emphasized my. “Les Touches is not respectable. Its mistress leads an
irregular life; she will corrupt our Calyste. Already Camille Maupin
has made him read many books; he has had adventures—You knew all that,
my naughty child, and you never said one word to your best friends!”

“The chevalier is discreet,” said his father, “a virtue of the olden
time.”

“Too discreet,” said the jealous mother, observing the red flush on her
son’s forehead.

“My dear mother,” said Calyste, kneeling beside the baroness, “I didn’t
think it necessary to publish my defeat. Mademoiselle des Touches, or,
if you choose, Camille Maupin, rejected my love more than eighteen
months ago, during her last stay at Les Touches. She laughed at me,
gently; saying she might very well be my mother; that a woman of forty
committed a sort of crime against nature in loving a minor, and that she
was incapable of such depravity. She made a thousand little jokes, which
hurt me—for she is witty as an angel; but when she saw me weep she tried
to comfort me, and offered me her friendship nobly. She has more heart
than talent; she is as generous as you are. I am now her child. On her
return here lately, hearing she loves another, I have resigned myself.
Do not repeat the calumnies against her. Camille is an artist, she has
genius, she leads one of those exceptional lives not to be judged like
ordinary lives.”

“My child,” said religious Fanny, “nothing can excuse a woman for not
conducting herself as the Church requires. She fails in her duty to God
and society by abjuring the gentle tenets of her sex. A woman sins in
even going to a theatre; but to write the impieties that actors repeat,
to roam the world, first with an enemy to the Pope, and then with a
musician, ah! Calyste, you can never persuade me such acts are deeds of
faith, hope, or charity. Her fortune was given by God to do good, and
what good does she do with hers?”

Calyste sprang up and looked at his mother.

“Mother,” he said, “Camille is my friend; I cannot hear her spoken of
this way; I would give my very life for her.”

“Your life!” said the baroness, startled. “Your life is our life, the
life of all of us.”

“My nephew has just said many things I do not understand,” said the old
sister, turning to her dozing brother.

“Where did he learn them?” said the mother; “at Les Touches.”

“Yes, my darling mother; she found me ignorant as a carp, and she has
taught me.”

“You knew the essential things when you learned the duties taught us by
religion,” replied the baroness. “Ah! this woman is fated to destroy
your noble and sacred beliefs.”

The old maid rose and solemnly stretched forth her hands toward her
brother, who woke with a start at the sound of his wife’s voice.

“Calyste,” she said, in a voice from her heart, “your father has never
opened books; he speaks Breton, he fought for God and for the king.
Educated people did the evil—be educated if you choose!”

So saying, she sat down and began to knit with a rapidity betraying
inward emotion.

“My angel,” said the mother, weeping, “I foresee some evil coming upon
you in that house.”

“Who is making Fanny weep?” cried the old man, waking. He looked round
upon his sister, his son, and the baroness. “What is the matter?” he
asked.

“Nothing, my friend,” replied his wife.

“Mamma,” said Calyste, whispering, “it is impossible for me to explain
now; but to-night you and I will talk. When you know all, you will bless
Mademoiselle des Touches.”

“Mothers do not like to curse,” replied the baroness. “I could not curse
a woman who truly loved my Calyste.”

The young man bade adieu and went out. The baron and his wife rose to
see him pass through the courtyard, open the gate, and disappear. The
baroness did not take up the newspaper; she was too agitated. In this
tranquil life such a discussion was the equivalent of a quarrel. Though
somewhat calmed, her motherly uneasiness persisted. Whither would such a
friendship lead? Bless Mademoiselle des Touches? how could that be? These
questions were as momentous to her simple soul as revolution is to a
statesman. Camille Maupin was Revolution itself in that calm home.

“I fear that woman will ruin him,” she said, picking up the paper.

“My dear Fanny,” said the old baron, with a jaunty air, “you are too
much of an angel to understand these things. Mademoiselle des Touches is,
they say, as black as a crow, as strong as a Turk, and forty years old.
Our dear Calyste was certain to fall in love with her. Of course he will
tell honorable little lies to conceal his happiness. Let him alone to
amuse himself with his first illusions.”

“If it had been any other woman—” began the baroness.

“But, my dear Fanny, if the woman were a saint she would not accept your
son.” The baroness picked up the paper. “I will go and see her myself,”
added the baron, “and tell you all about her.”

This speech has no savor at the moment. But after reading the biography
of Camille Maupin you can imagine the old baron entering the lists
against that illustrious woman.

VI. BIOGRAPHY OF CAMILLE MAUPIN

The town of Guerande, which for two months past had seen Calyste, its
flower and pride, often going to Les Touches, concluded Mademoiselle
Félicité des Touches was passionately in love with the youth, and that
she practised all kinds of sorceries. Young girls and wives asked by what
right an old woman exercised so absolute an empire over that angel. When
Calyste passed along the Grand Rue many a regretful eye watched him.

It became necessary to explain the rumors about the person Calyste went
to see. These rumors, swollen by Breton gossip, reached the rector.
The receiver of taxes, the juge de paix, the head of Saint-Nazaire
custom-house and other lettered persons did not reassure the abbé by
relating the strange life of the female writer who concealed herself
under the masculine name Camille Maupin. She did not yet eat little
children nor kill lovers like Cleopatra, but to Abbé Grimont this
monstrous creature—a cross between a siren and an atheist—violated
every social law invented to restrain the infirmities of womankind.

Just as Clara Gazul is the female pseudonym of a distinguished male
writer, George Sand the masculine pseudonym of a gifted woman, so Camille
Maupin was the mask behind a charming Breton, Félicité des Touches, who
was now causing lively anxiety to the Baronne du Guenic and the
excellent rector of Guerande. The Breton des Touches family has no
connection with the Touraine family of that name.

Camille Maupin, one of the few celebrated women of the nineteenth
century, was long supposed to be a man because of the virility of her
first writings. All the world now knows the two volumes of plays,
published in 1822, that made a literary revolution when the question of
the classics and the romanticists palpitated. Since then, Camille Maupin
has written several plays and a novel, which sustained her initial
success. To explain why Félicité des Touches became a man and an author,
and why she kept her freedom and thus was more excusable than Madame de
Staël, would satisfy curiosity and do justice to a rare figure. Though
she plays a secondary role here, her importance in literary history and
influence on Calyste justify pausing before her.

Mademoiselle Félicité des Touches became an orphan in 1793. Her
property escaped confiscation by reason of her father’s and brother’s
deaths. Her father, killed on 10 August among defenders of the king,
served as major of the guards; her brother was massacred at Les Carmes.
Félicité was two when her mother died a few days later of grief, and the
dying mother confided her to a sister, a nun of Chelles. Madame de
Faucombe took the orphan to Faucombe, an estate near Nantes, and settled
with the little girl and three convent sisters. The populace of Nantes
seized the nuns and Félicité on a false charge; Thermidor released them.
Félicité’s aunt died of fear; two sisters left France, and the third
confided the child to Monsieur de Faucombe, her maternal great-uncle,
who lived in Nantes.

Monsieur de Faucombe, an old man of sixty, had married a young woman
who managed his affairs. He busied himself in archaeology—the mania of
old men who fancy themselves living. His ward’s education was left to
chance. Little cared for by his wife, Félicité brought herself up as a
boy. She kept company with Faucombe in his library and read everything.
Thus she obtained theoretical knowledge of life and had no innocence of
mind, though personally chaste. Her intellect floated on undigested
knowledge while her heart remained pure. Her learning became
extraordinary through passion for reading and a powerful memory. At
eighteen she was as well-informed on all topics as a young man entering
literary life. This prodigious reading governed her passions far more
than conventual life would have; imagination ran riot in convents, but
her brain, crammed and uncategorized, led to a deformity of intellect
without corrupting her chastity—an outcome that would have amazed
philosophers had Nantes suspected her powers.

The result was contrary to the cause. Félicité had no inclination toward
evil; she conceived everything by thought but abstained from deed.
Old Faucombe was enchanted and she helped him, writing three of his
books which the worthy old gentleman believed were his. Such mental
labor, ill-suited to girlhood, affected her health; her blood
overheated, her chest threatened with inflammation. Doctors ordered
horseback and society. She became an admirable horsewoman and recovered.

At eighteen she appeared in the world and produced such sensation that
no one in Nantes called her anything but “the beautiful Mademoiselle des
Touches.” Led to society by a woman’s impulse to be admired, she found
herself cold and unresponsive to worship. Hurt by her aunt and cousins,
who ridiculed her studies and teased her reluctance for society, she
resolved to be coquettish, gay, volatile—a woman. But she expected
conversations and pleasures in harmony with the elevation of her mind.
Instead she was filled with disgust for commonplace talk and military
supremacy in society. Neglecting minor accomplishments, she resolved to
be a musician. Retiring to study, she sent for Steibelt to perfect her;
the stay cost twelve thousand francs. Later in Paris she studied harmony
and composed music for two operas that have had success, though the
public does not know their true authorship; ostensibly they are by Conti,
a great musician—an affair belonging to the history of her heart.

The mediocrity of provincial society wearied her; though she returned to
salons to eclipse other women again by beauty and enjoy triumph as a
musician, she soon deserted them and returned to books, piano,
Beethoven, and old Faucombe. In 1812, at twenty-one, the archaeologist
handed her guardianship accounts, and she took control of a fortune:
fifteen thousand francs a year from Les Touches, twelve thousand from
Faucombe (increased by her leases), and a capital of three hundred
thousand francs laid by during her minority.

Félicité acquired an understanding of money and provincial administrative
wisdom. She drew her capital from the house where her guardian had
placed it and invested on the Grand-Livre at the moment of the retreat
from Moscow, increasing her income by thirty thousand francs. With
expenses paid she had fifty thousand francs a year to invest. At twenty-
one such force of will equals a man of thirty. Habits of criticism
enabled her to judge men, art, and public questions soberly. She
resolved to leave Nantes; but Faucombe fell ill and she nursed him for
eighteen months, remaining until his death as Napoleon struggled with
Europe.

A Royalist, she hastened to Paris at the Bourbons’ return. The Grandlieus
received her; the catastrophes of March 20 intervened, and her future
was vague. She saw the last image of the Empire and the Grand Army at
the Champ de Mars, a spectacle that stirred her noble soul. Political
commotions kept her mind occupied and preserved her from personal
emotions as royalist society dispersed. The Grandlieus followed the
Bourbons to Ghent, leaving their house to Mademoiselle des Touches.
Félicité, unwilling to be subordinate, purchased for 130,000 francs one
of the finest houses in rue Mont Blanc, where she installed herself in
1815. The garden of this house is now worth two million.

Accustomed to control her life, Félicité familiarized herself with the
ways of thought and action held to be exclusively masculine. In 1816 she
was twenty-five. She knew nothing of marriage; her conception was
theoretical. Her superior mind refused the abdication that married life
requires; she valued independence and felt disgust for maternity’s
duties.

These details explain the anomalies of Camille Maupin. Having known no
parents, being her own mistress from childhood under an archaeologist’s
guardianship, she was flung into knowledge and imagination instead of
the rigid feminine education of dress, propriety, and accomplishments.
Long before celebrated, a glance showed she had never played with dolls.

Toward the close of 1817 Félicité perceived a lassitude of body and a
change would soon come from obstinate celibacy. She wanted to retain
youth and beauty, clinging to them. Science warned her of Nature’s
sentence that time brings. The macerated face of her aunt returned and
made her shudder. Placed between marriage and love, she wanted freedom;
but she was no longer indifferent to homage and admiration. At the
moment this history begins she was almost what she had been in 1817.
Eighteen years had passed and respected her. At forty she might have been
thought twenty-five.

Thus to describe her in 1836 is to picture her as in 1817. Women who
know conditions of temperament and happiness that resist time will
understand how Félicité enjoyed this privilege: the brightest tints of
Nature’s palette and a rich setting.

Brittany presents a curious problem: predominance of dark hair, brown
eyes, and swarthy complexions near England. Whether race or atmospheric
influences explain this peculiarity, fair complexions are rare there.
Mademoiselle des Touches, a true Breton, is of medium height but seems
taller by her face’s character. Her skin, olive by day and dazzling by
candlelight, is like animated ivory; it shines and only a violent
emotion can color the cheeks, which fade quickly, giving impassibility
to the face. The face, longer than oval, resembles an Isis in bas-
reliefs; it has the purity of sphinx heads. The black abundant hair
falls in heavy masses, reinforcing the face’s severity. The forehead is
full, broad, swelling at the temples, illuminated by surfaces that catch
the light—a determined brow, silent and self-contained. The arch of the
eyebrows surmounts eyes that at times scintillate like a fixed star. The
white of the eye has the texture of horn; the pupil is surrounded by an
orange circle—bronze set in vivid gold. This pupil has depth; it is not
underlaid by a foil that sends back light as in cat-like eyes; it lacks
terrible inflexibility but contains something of the infinite. The
glance gathers and retreats with rapidity. In passion Camille’s eyes are
sublime; in repose they are dull; the torpor of meditation lends them an
air of stupidity.

The lashes are short, thick, and black; the eyelids brown with red
fibrils, graceful and strong—two qualities rarely united. The circle
round the eyes shows no blemish or wrinkle. The cheek-bones are soft
but pronounced, completing the face’s strength. The nose, thin and
straight, has oblique nostrils dilated passionately at times. It is an
admirable continuation of the forehead. Its tip has a mobility that
expresses indignation, anger, or irony—Talma noted that above all. The
immobility of the nostril indicates narrowness; it contracts like the
lips; a miser never has an oscillating nose.

Camille’s mouth arches at the corners, vivid red; blood abounds there,
supplying the seduction of the lips. The upper lip is thin with a low
furrow linking to the nose, giving a curve of disdain. The lower lip is
full and adorable in kindness, swelling with love, like an outer petal
of a pomegranate. The chin is firm and full, expressing resolution.
There is a tender down beneath the nose. Ears are delicately convoluted,
a sign of secret refinement. The bust is large, the waist slim, hips not
prominent but graceful; the thighs’ line is magnificent, recalling
Bacchus rather than Callipyge. Here appears the vague similarity of
women of genius to men: neither the suppleness nor soft abandonment of
those destined for maternity; their gait lacks faltering motions. Camille’s
neck curves out from the nape, un-sinuous, linking head to shoulders
with athletic magnificence. The arms spring superbly and end in English
delicate wrists and charming hands—plump, dimpled, with rosy,
almond-shaped nails—white, revealing the body has a different
complexion from the face. The head’s firm carriage is corrected by the
mobility of the lips and the nostrils’ artistic play.

Yet in spite of all these promises the face has something vexatious.
More sad and serious than gracious, it bears the melancholy of constant
meditation. Mademoiselle des Touches listens more than she talks; she
startles by silence and that deep attentive glance. No educated person
could see her without thinking of Cleopatra. But in Camille the natural
animal is complete, self-sufficing, leonine; a man may regret such a
great mind in such a body and wish she were wholly woman. He fears an
abnormal soul. Does she judge and not feel? Or does she feel and judge
at once? Able for all things through her brain, ought her course to be
circumscribed by other women’s limits? Has intellectual strength
weakened her heart? Has she no charm? Can she descend to tender nothings
by which a woman occupies and soothes the man she loves? Will she cast
aside a sentiment when it no longer responds to a vision of infinitude?
Who can scale the heights her eyes have risen to? Yes, one fears in
such a woman something unattainable, unpossessable, unconquerable. The
woman of strong mind should remain a symbol; as reality she must be
feared. Camille Maupin is in some ways the living image of Schiller’s
Isis, seated in the temple’s darkness, at whose feet priests find dead
bodies of daring men who consulted her.

Adventures of her life, reputed true and never disavowed by Camille,
enforce questions her person suggests. Perhaps she likes those
calumnies.

The nature of her beauty has not been without influence on her fame;
it served her, as did fortune and position in society. If a sculptor
wants Brittany’s type, let him take Mademoiselle des Touches. That
full-blooded, powerful temperament resists time. The constant nourishment
of the skin’s pulp, so to speak, is Nature’s arm to resist wrinkles;
Camille’s calm impassibility aided it.

In 1817 she opened her house to artists, authors, learned and scientific
men, and publicists—society her tastes led her to. Her salon resembled
Baron Gérard’s, where men of rank mingled with distinguished men and
the élite of Parisian women. Her parentage and fortune increased by her
aunt’s protected her attempt to create such society. Ambitious mothers
hoped to induce her to marry their sons whose fortunes outshone their
escutcheons. Several peers, allured by eighty thousand francs a year
and a magnificent house, took their womenkind to visit her. Diplomats,
seeking intellect’s amusements, came and found enjoyment. Mademoiselle
des Touches, surrounded by various interests, studied the comedies of
passion, covetousness, and ambition performed by men even high in the
social scale. She saw the world as it is and did not fall early into
absorbing love that warps a woman’s mind.

Ordinarily a woman feels, enjoys, and judges successively, giving three
ages, the last coinciding with old age. In Mademoiselle des Touches this
order reversed. Her youth was wrapped in the snows of knowledge and the
ice of reflection. This transposition explains her life’s strangeness
and talent. She observed men when most women see one; she despised what
others admired, detected falsehood in accepted flatteries, and laughed
at things that made others serious. This contradiction lasted but came
to a terrible end; she was destined to find a first love, young and
fresh, at an age when women are summoned by Nature to renounce love.

A first affair remains secret. Félicité, like other women, was induced
to believe bodily beauty was soul beauty. She fell in love with a face
and learned the folly of a gallant man who saw only a woman. After
time she recovered, consoled by a friend, a man without personal motive
or concealing it. In him Félicité believed she found the mind and heart
missing in her former lover. He possessed one of the most original minds
of his age. He, too, wrote under a pseudonym; his first publications
were those of an adorer of Italy. Travel, which Félicité lacked, he
gave her. A man of genius, poet and critic, he took Félicité to Italy to
make her know Art’s country. This celebrated, nameless man was the
master and maker of “Camille Maupin.” He ordered and shaped the mass of
her knowledge, increased it with study of Italy’s masterpieces, and
gave her the frankness, freedom, and epigrammatic grace of his talent,
which Camille softened with delicacy of sentiment natural to a woman.
He roused her taste for German and English literature and made her learn
both languages while traveling. In Rome, in 1820, he deserted her for an
Italian. Without that misery she might never have been celebrated.
Napoleon called misfortune the midwife of genius. This event filled
Félicité with contempt for men and turned Félicité into Camille Maupin.

She returned to Paris with Conti, the great musician, for whom she wrote
librettos. But she had no more illusions and became, at heart, a
female Don Juan without debts or conquests. Encouraged by success, she
published the two volumes of plays that placed Camille Maupin among
illustrious anonymas. Next she told her betrayed love in a short novel,
one of the period’s masterpieces, a dangerous example classed with
“Adolphe.” The true secret of her literary metamorphosis and pseudonym
has never been fully understood. Some think it lay in a feminine desire
to escape fame while offering a man’s name to criticism.

Despite any such desire, her celebrity increased through her salon,
wit, correct judgments, and solid acquirements. She became an authority;
her sayings were quoted; she could not lay aside functions Paris
society gave her. She was an acknowledged exception. The world bowed to
her genius and position; women admired her mind, men her beauty. Her
conduct followed social conventions. Her friendships seemed purely
platonic. There was nothing of the female author about her. Mademoiselle
des Touches is charming as a woman of the world—languid when she
pleases, indolent, coquettish, concerned about her toilet, pleased with
airy nothings seductive to women and poets. She understands that after
Madame de Staël there is no place in this century for a Sappho, and that
Ninon could not exist in Paris without grands seigneurs and a voluptuous
court. She is the Ninon of the intellect; she adores Art and artists and
goes from poet to musician, sculptor to prose-writer. Her heart is noble
and generous, making her a dupe; she is filled with pity for sorrow and
contempt for the prosperous. Since 1830 she has been the centre of a
choice circle, surrounded by friends who love and esteem each other.
Far from Madame de Staël’s noisy fuss and political strife, she jokes
about Camille Maupin, that junior of George Sand (whom she calls her
brother Cain), admiring her rival with angelic composure, feeling no
jealousy.

Until this period she had led as happy a life as a strong woman can.
From 1817 to 1834 she came five or six times to Les Touches. Her first
stay followed her 1818 disillusion. The house was uninhabitable; she took
a lodging in the village, sad and seeing no one; she wanted to contemplate
herself after disaster. She sent to Paris for furniture to furnish Les
Touches. It came to Nantes, then by small boats to Croisic, then across
sands to Les Touches. Workmen from Paris fitted it, and she occupied Les
Touches, pleased to meditate there like a cloistered nun.

At winter’s end she returned to Paris. Guerande was roused to diabolical
curiosity; talk was of Asiatic luxury at Les Touches. Her man of
business ordered visitors be admitted to view the house. People flocked
from nearby villages. Public curiosity brought seventeen francs over two
years to the porter and gardener.

After this Mademoiselle des Touches did not revisit Les Touches for two
years, not until her return from Italy with Conti. Guerande was slow to
learn of her presence. Later apparitions excited little interest. Her
Parisian fame did not yet precede her; only her man of business knew of
her writings and relation to Camille Maupin. But by the time of this
story the contagion of new ideas had progressed in Guerande; several
persons knew of her dual existence. Letters came to the post-office
addressed to Camille Maupin at Les Touches. In a region so Catholic,
archaic, and prejudiced, her singular life naturally caused rumors,
some of which reached Abbé Grimont and alarmed him; such a life seemed
unnatural and improper.

Félicité, during her present stay, was not alone at Les Touches. She
had a guest: Claude Vignon, a scornful and powerful writer who, though
a critic, gave an impression of superiority. Mademoiselle des Touches
had received him for seven years, as she had many authors, journalists,
artists, and men of the world. She knew his nerveless nature, laziness,
penury, and disgust for all things, and yet by her conduct she seemed
inclined to marry him. She explained this in various ways—ambition, the
dread of a lonely old age; she wanted to confide her future to a
superior man whom her fortune would make important in the literary
world.

With these apparent intentions she had brought Claude Vignon from Paris
to Les Touches, as an eagle bears away a kid—to study him and decide
some course. But she was misleading both Calyste and Claude; she was not
thinking of marriage; her heart was in the throes of the most violent
convulsion that could agitate a soul as strong as hers. Too late she
saw life lighted by the sun of love, shining as it shines in a heart of
twenty.

Let us now see Camille’s convent where this was happening.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
A few hundred yards from Guerande the soil of Brittany ends; the salt‑marshes and sandy dunes begin. We descend into a desert left by the sea, by a rugged road through a ravine that has never seen a carriage. This desert contains waste tracts, ponds of unequal size, muddy banks where salt is made, and a little arm of the sea that separates the mainland from the island of Croisic. Geographically Croisic is really a peninsula; but as it holds to Brittany only by the beaches connecting it with the village of Batz (barren quicksands hard to cross), it may be more correct to call it an island.

Where the road from Croisic to Guerande turns off from the main road stands a country‑house, surrounded by a large garden, remarkable for its trimmed and twisted pines, some shaped like sun‑shades, others stripped of branches, showing reddened trunks where bark has peeled. These trees, victims of hurricanes and growing against wind and tide, prepare the mind for the strange sight of marshes and dunes that resemble a stiffened ocean. The house, built of slaty stone with granite courses, has little architecture; a plain wall with regularly spaced windows, small leaded panes on the ground floor and larger panes above. Attics stretch under an enormously high pointed roof with two gables and two large dormers on each side. Under each gable’s triangular point a circular window opens its cyclopic eye, westerly to the sea, easterly on Guerande. One façade faces the road to Guerande, the other the desert at the end of which is Croisic; beyond that little town is the open sea. A brook escapes through an opening in the park wall that skirts the road to Croisic, crosses the road, and is lost in the sands.

The gray tones of the house harmonize with the scene it overlooks. The park is an oasis in the surrounding desert; at its entrance a mud‑hut shelters custom‑house officials. This house without much land (most of the estate is in Guerande) derives income from the marshes and a few outlying farms of over ten thousand francs a year. Such is the fief of Les Touches, from which the Revolution lopped away feudal rights. The paludiers, however, continue to call it “the chateau,” and would still say “seigneur” if the fief were not now in the female line. When Felicite set about restoring Les Touches she, artist that she is, did not change the desolate exterior that gives it the look of a prison. The sole change was an entrance gate enlivened by two brick columns supporting an arch beneath which carriages pass into the court where she planted trees.

The ground floor follows the arrangement of nearly all country houses built a hundred years ago. It was evidently erected on the ruins of some old castle formerly perched there. A large paneled entrance‑hall has been turned by Felicite into a billiard‑room; from it opens an immense salon with six windows, and the dining‑room. The kitchen communicates with the dining‑room through an office. Camille has shown noble simplicity in arranging this floor, avoiding splendid decoration. The salon, painted gray, is furnished in old mahogany with green silk coverings. The dining‑room contains four great mahogany buffets, horsehair chairs, and superb Audran engravings in mahogany frames. The old wooden staircase with heavy balusters is covered with a green carpet.

Above are two suites separated by the staircase. Mademoiselle des Touches has taken the one that looks toward the sea and the marshes, arranging it with a small salon, a large chamber, and two cabinets, one a dressing‑room, the other a study and writing‑room. The other suite she has made into two guest apartments, each with a bedroom, antechamber, and cabinet. The servants’ rooms are in the attic. The guest rooms are furnished with what is necessary, no more. A certain fantastic luxury is reserved for her own apartment. In that sombre, melancholy habitation, looking upon the sombre landscape, she wanted the most fantastic creations of art she could find. The little salon is hung with Gobelin tapestry framed in marvelously carved oak. The windows are draped with heavy silken hangings of a past age, a brocade shot with crimson and gold against green and yellow, gathered into mighty pleats and trimmed with fringes, cords, and tassels fit for a church. This salon contains a chest or cabinet worth seven or eight thousand francs, a carved ebony table, a secretary with many drawers inlaid with ivory arabesques bought in Venice, and other noble Gothic furniture. Here too are pictures and articles of choice workmanship bought in 1818, when no one suspected their ultimate value. Her bedroom is strictly Louis XV: a carved white bedstead with Cupids scattering flowers, a canopy, blue silk hangings; the Pompadour dressing‑table; bits of singular furniture—a duchesse, a chaise‑longue, a stiff little sofa—silk window‑curtains lined with pink satin, tied with silken ropes, and a Savonnerie carpet; in short, all those elegant dainties in which eighteenth‑century women lived and loved.

The study, entirely contemporary, contrasts with the Louis XV gallantries and offers a charming collection of mahogany furniture; it resembles a boudoir. The bookshelves are full, but trivialities of a woman’s existence encumber it; amid them an inquisitive eye perceives, with uneasy surprise, pistols, a narghile, a riding‑whip, a hammock, a rifle, a man’s blouse, tobacco, pipes, a knapsack—a bizarre combination that paints Felicite.

Every great soul entering that room would be struck by the peculiar beauty of the landscape spreading its broad savanna beyond the park, the last vegetation on the continent. The melancholy squares of water, divided by little paths of white salt crust along which the salt‑makers pass (dressed in white) to rake and gather the salt into mulons; a space whose saline exhalations prevent birds from crossing and stifle botanical effort; sands where the eye is soothed only by one hardy plant bearing rosy flowers and the Chartreux pansy; that lake of salt water, the sandy dunes, the view of Croisic, a miniature town afloat like Venice on the sea; and the mighty ocean tossing its foaming fringe upon the granite rocks—this sight uplifts and saddens; the sublime produces a regretful yearning for things unknown yet perceived by the soul on far‑off heights. These wild harmonies are for great spirits and great sorrows only.

This desert scene, where at times the sun’s rays, reflected by water and sands, whiten the village of Batz and ripple pitilessly on the roofs of Croisic, filled Camille’s dreaming mind for days. She seldom looked to the cool, refreshing scenes, the groves, the meadows around Guerande. Her soul struggled to endure a horrible inward anguish.

No sooner did Calyste see the vanes of the two gables shooting up beyond roadside furze and distorted pines than the air seemed lighter; Guerande was a prison to him; his life was at Les Touches. Who will not understand the attraction to a youth in his position? A love like Cherubin’s had flung him at the feet of a person who was a great and grand thing to him before he thought of her as a woman, and it had survived Felicite’s repeated and inexplicable refusals. This sentiment, more a need of loving than love itself, had not escaped Camille’s power of analysis; hence, possibly, her rejection—a generosity unperceived, of course, by Calyste.

At Les Touches the ravished eyes of the ignorant young countryman beheld the riches of a new world; he heard another language. He listened to the poetic sounds of the finest music, that surpassing music of the nineteenth century, in which melody and harmony blend or struggle—music in which song and instrumentation reach a new perfection. He saw works of modern painters, the French school, now the heir of Italy, Spain, and Flanders, where talent has become common and hearts, weary of talent, call aloud for genius. He read works of imagination, creations of modern literature that impressed his unused heart. In short, the great Nineteenth Century appeared to him in all its collective magnificence, its critical spirit, its desires for renovation in all directions, and its vast efforts—nearly all on the scale of the giant who cradled the century in his banners and sang hymns with the lullaby of cannon.

Initiated by Felicite into all these things, which may escape those who create them, Calyste gratified at Les Touches the taste for the glorious, powerful at his age, and that artless admiration, the first love of adolescence, always irritated by criticism. It is natural that flame should rise! He listened to charming Parisian raillery, graceful satire revealing French wit and qualities of the French mind, and awakened in him a thousand ideas that might have slumbered forever in the soft torpor of his family life. For him, Mademoiselle des Touches was the mother of his intellect. She was so kind; a woman is always adorable to a man in whom she inspires love, even when she seems not to share it.

At the present time Felicite was giving him music lessons. To him the grand apartments on the lower floor and her private rooms above, so coquettish, so artistic, were vivified by a light, a spirit, a supernatural atmosphere, strange and undefinable. The modern world with its poesy sharply contrasted with the dull patriarchal world of Guerande; the two systems faced one another. On one side all the thousand developments of Art, on the other the sameness of uncivilized Brittany. No one will therefore ask why the poor lad, bored like his mother with the pleasures of mouche, quivered as he approached the house, rang the bell, and crossed the court. Such emotions do not assail a mature man, trained to life’s ups and downs.

As the door opened, Calyste, hearing the piano, supposed Camille was in the salon; but in the billiard‑hall he no longer heard it. Camille, he thought, must be playing on a small upright piano brought by Conti from England and placed in her little salon. He ran up the stairs where the thick carpet smothered his steps; but he slowed as he neared the top, perceiving something unusual about the music. Felicite was playing for herself only; she was communing with her own being.

Instead of entering the room, the young man sat on a Gothic seat covered with green velvet on the landing beneath a window artistically framed in carved wood. Nothing was more mysteriously melancholy than Camille’s improvisation; it seemed like the cry of a soul de profundis—from the depths of a grave! The heart of the young lover recognized the cry of despairing love, the prayer of a hidden plaint, the groan of repressed affliction. Camille had varied, modified, and lengthened the introduction to the cavatina “Mercy for thee, mercy for me!” which is nearly the whole of the fourth act of Robert le Diable. She now suddenly sang the words in a heart‑rending manner, and then as suddenly interrupted herself. Calyste entered, and saw the reason. Poor Camille Maupin! poor Felicite! She turned to him with a face bathed in tears, took out her handkerchief, dried them, and said simply, without affectation, “Good‑morning.” She was beautiful as she sat in her morning gown. On her head was one of those red chenille nets, much worn in those days, through which coils of black hair shone, escaping here and there. A short upper garment like a Greek peplum revealed cambric trousers with embroidered frills and the prettiest of Turkish slippers, red and gold.

“What is the matter?” cried Calyste.

“He has not returned,” she replied, going to a window and looking out upon the sands, the sea, and the marshes.

This answer explained all. Camille was awaiting Claude Vignon.

“You are anxious about him?” asked Calyste.

“Yes,” she answered, with a sadness the lad was too ignorant to analyze.

He started to leave the room.

“Where are you going?” she asked.

“To find him,” he replied.

“Dear child!” she said, taking his hand and drawing him toward her with one of those moist glances which to a youthful soul are the best recompense. “You are distracted! Where could you find him on that wide shore?”

“I will find him.”

“Your mother would be in mortal terror. Stay. Besides, I choose it,” she said, making him sit on the sofa. “Don’t pity me. The tears you see are the tears a woman likes to shed. We have a faculty that is not in man—that of abandoning ourselves to our nervous nature and driving our feelings to an extreme. By imagining certain situations and encouraging imagination we end in tears, and sometimes in serious illness or disorder. The fancies of women are not actions of the mind; they are of the heart. You have come just in time; solitude is bad for me. I am not the dupe of his professed desire to go to Croisic and see the rocks and dunes and salt‑marshes without me. He meant to leave us alone together; he is jealous, or rather he pretends jealousy, and you are young, you are handsome.”

“Why not have told me this before? What must I do? Must I stay away?” asked Calyste, with difficulty restraining his tears, one rolling down his cheek and touching Felicite deeply.

“You are an angel!” she cried. Then she gaily sang the “Stay! stay!” of Matilde in Guillaume Tell, taking all gravity from that magnificent answer of the princess to her subject. “He only wants to make me think he loves me better than he really does,” she said. “He knows how much I desire his happiness,” she went on, looking attentively at Calyste. “Perhaps he feels humiliated to be inferior to me there. Perhaps he suspects you and means to surprise us. But even if his only crime is to take his pleasure without me, and not associate me with the ideas this new place gives him, is that not enough? Ah! I am no more loved by that great brain than I was by the musician, by the poet, by the soldier! Sterne is right; names signify much; mine is a bitter sarcasm. I shall die without finding in any man the love that fills my heart, the poesy that is in my soul—”

She stopped, her arms pendant, her head lying back on the cushions, her eyes fixed on a pattern of the carpet. The pain of great minds has something grandiose and imposing; it reveals a vast extent of soul which the spectator’s thought extends still further. Such souls share privileges of royalty whose affections belong to a people and so affect a world.

“Why did you reject my—” said Calyste; but he could not end his sentence. Camille’s beautiful hand laid upon his eloquently interrupted him.

“Nature changed her laws in granting me a dozen years of youth beyond my due,” she said. “I rejected your love from egotism. Sooner or later the difference in our ages must have parted us. I am thirteen years older than he, and even that is too much.”

“You will be beautiful at sixty,” cried Calyste, heroically.

“God grant it,” she answered, smiling. “Besides, dear child, I want to love. In spite of his cold heart, his lack of imagination, his cowardly indifference, and the envy which consumes him, I believe there is greatness behind those tatters; I hope to galvanize that heart, to save him from himself, to attach him to me. Alas! I have a clear‑seeing mind, but a blind heart.”

She was terrible in her knowledge of herself. She suffered and analyzed her feelings as Cuvier and Dupuytren explained to friends the fatal advance of their disease and the progress of death in their bodies. Camille Maupin knew the passion within her as those men of science knew their own anatomy.

“I have brought him here to judge him, and he is already bored,” she continued. “He pines for Paris, I tell him; the nostalgia of criticism is on him; he has no author to pluck, no system to undermine, no poet to drive to despair, and he dares not commit some debauch in this house that might lift for a moment the burden of his ennui. Alas! my love is not real enough, perhaps, to soothe his brain; I don’t intoxicate him! Make him drunk at dinner tonight and I shall know if I am right. I will say I am ill, and stay in my room.”

Calyste turned scarlet from his neck to his forehead; even his ears burned.

“Oh! forgive me,” she cried. “How can I heedlessly deprave your girlish innocence! Forgive me, Calyste—” She paused. “There are some superb, consistent natures who say at a certain age: ‘If I had my life to live over again, I would do the same things.’ I who do not think myself weak, I say, ‘I would be a woman like your mother, Calyste.’ To have a Calyste, oh! what happiness! I could be humble and submissive—and yet I have done no harm except to myself. But alas! dear child, a woman cannot stand alone in society except in a primitive state. Affections not in harmony with social or natural laws, affections that are not obligatory, in short, escape us. Suffering for suffering, as well be useful where we can. What care I for those children of my cousin Faucombe? I have not seen them these twenty years, and they are married to merchants. You are my son, who have never cost me the miseries of motherhood; I shall leave you my fortune and make you happy—at least, so far as money can do so, dear treasure of beauty and grace that nothing should ever change or blast.”

“You would not take my love,” said Calyste, “and I shall return your fortune to your heirs.”

“Child!” answered Camille, in a guttural voice, letting tears roll down her cheeks. “Will nothing save me from myself?” she added presently.

“You said you had a history to tell me, and a letter to—” said the generous youth, wishing to divert her thoughts from her grief; but she did not let him finish.

“You are right to remind me of that. I will be an honest woman before all else. I will sacrifice no one—Yes, it was too late yesterday, but today we have time,” she said cheerfully. “I will keep my promise; and while I tell you that history I will sit by the window and watch the road to the marshes.”

Calyste arranged a great Gothic chair for her near the window and opened one sash. Camille Maupin, who shared the oriental taste of her illustrious sister‑author, took a magnificent Persian narghile given her by an ambassador. She filled the nipple with patchouli, cleaned the bochettino, perfumed the goose‑quill which she attached to the mouthpiece and used only once, set fire to the yellow leaves, placed the vase with its long neck enameled in blue and gold at some distance, and rang the bell for tea.

“Will you have cigarettes?—Ah! I am always forgetting that you do not smoke. Purity such as yours is so rare! The hand of Eve herself, fresh from the hand of her Maker, is alone innocent enough to stroke your cheek.”

Calyste colored; sitting down on a stool at Camille’s feet, he did not see the deep emotion that seemed for a moment to overcome her.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“I promised you this tale of the past, and here it is,” said Camille.

“The person from whom I received that letter yesterday, and who may be here to-morrow, is the Marquise de Rochefide. The old marquis, whose family is not as old as yours, after marrying his eldest daughter to a Portuguese grandee, was anxious to find an alliance among the higher nobility for his son to obtain the peerage he had never secured. The Comtesse de Montcornet told him of a young lady in the department of the Orne, a Mademoiselle Beatrix-Maximilienne-Rose de Casteran, the youngest daughter of the Marquis de Casteran, who wished to marry his two daughters without dowries in order to reserve his whole fortune for the Comte de Casteran, his son. The Casterans are, it seems, of the bluest blood. Beatrix, born and brought up at the chateau de Casteran, was twenty years old at the time of her marriage in 1828. She was remarkable for what you provincials call originality, which is simply independence of ideas, enthusiasm, a feeling for the beautiful, and a certain impulse and ardor toward the things of Art. You may believe a poor woman who has allowed herself to be drawn along the same lines, there is nothing more dangerous for a woman. If she follows them, they lead her where you see me, and where the marquise came,--to the verge of abysses. Men alone have the staff on which to lean as they skirt those precipices,--a force which is lacking to most women, but which, if we do possess it, makes abnormal beings of us. Her old grandmother, the dowager de Casteran, was well pleased to see her marry a man to whom she was superior in every way. The Rochefides were equally satisfied with the Casterans, who connected them with the Verneuils, the d’Esgrignons, the Troisvilles, and gave them a peerage for their son in that last big batch of peers made by Charles X., but revoked by the revolution of July. The first days of marriage are perilous for little minds as well as for great loves. Rochefide, being a fool, mistook his wife’s ignorance for coldness; he classed her among frigid, lymphatic women, and made that an excuse to return to his bachelor life, relying on the coldness of the marquise, her pride, and the thousand barriers that the life of a great lady sets up about a woman in Paris. You’ll know what I mean when you go there. People said to Rochefide: ‘You are very lucky to possess a cold wife who will never have any but head passions. She will always be content if she can shine; her fancies are purely artistic, her desires will be satisfied if she can make a salon, and collect about her distinguished minds; her debauches will be in music and her orgies literary.’ Rochefide, however, is not an ordinary fool; he has as much conceit and vanity as a clever man, which gives him a mean and squinting jealousy, brutal when it comes to the surface, lurking and cowardly for six months, and murderous the seventh. He thought he was deceiving his wife, and yet he feared her,--two causes for tyranny when the day came on which the marquise let him see that she was charitably assuming indifference to his unfaithfulness. I analyze all this in order to explain her conduct. Beatrix had the keenest admiration for me; there is but one step, however, from admiration to jealousy. I have one of the most remarkable salons in Paris; she wished to make herself another; and in order to do so she attempted to draw away my circle. I don’t know how to keep those who wish to leave me. She obtained the superficial people who are friends with every one from mere want of occupation, and whose object is to get out of a salon as soon as they have entered it; but she did not have time to make herself a real society. In those days I thought her consumed with a desire for celebrity of one kind or another. Nevertheless, she has really much grandeur of soul, a regal pride, distinct ideas, and a marvellous facility for apprehending and understanding all things; she can talk metaphysics and music, theology and painting. You will see her, as a mature woman, what the rest of us saw her as a bride. And yet there is something of affectation about her in all this. She has too much the air of knowing abstruse things,--Chinese, Hebrew, hieroglyphics perhaps, or the papyrus that they wrapped round mummies. Personally, Beatrix is one of those blondes beside whom Eve the fair would seem a Negress. She is slender and straight and white as a church taper; her face is long and pointed; the skin is capricious, to-day like cambric, to-morrow darkened with little speckles beneath its surface, as if her blood had left a deposit of dust there during the night. Her forehead is magnificent, though rather daring. The pupils of her eyes are pale sea-green, floating on their white balls under thin lashes and lazy eyelids. Her eyes have dark rings around them often; her nose, which describes one-quarter of a circle, is pinched about the nostrils; very shrewd and clever, but supercilious. She has an Austrian mouth; the upper lip has more character than the lower, which drops disdainfully. Her pale cheeks have no color unless some very keen emotion moves her. Her chin is rather fat; mine is not thin, and perhaps I do wrong to tell you that women with fat chins are exacting in love. She has one of the most exquisite waists I ever saw; the shoulders are beautiful, but the bust has not developed as well, and the arms are thin. She has, however, an easy carriage and manner, which redeems all such defects and sets her beauties in full relief. Nature has given her that princess air which can never be acquired; it becomes her, and reveals at sudden moments the woman of high birth. Without being faultlessly beautiful, or prettily pretty, she produces, when she chooses, ineffaceable impressions. She has only to put on a gown of cherry velvet with clouds of lace, and wreathe with roses that angelic hair of hers, which resembles floods of light, and she becomes divine. If, on some excuse or other, she could wear the costume of the time when women had long, pointed bodices, rising, slim and slender, from voluminous brocaded skirts with folds so heavy that they stood alone, and could hide her arms in those wadded sleeves with ruffles, from which the hand comes out like a pistil from a calyx, and could fling back the curls of her head into the jewelled knot behind her head, Beatrix would hold her own victoriously with ideal beauties like that.”

And Felicite showed Calyste a fine copy of a picture by Mieris, in which was a woman robed in white satin, standing with a paper in her hand, and singing with a Brabancon seigneur, while a Negro beside them poured golden Spanish wine into a goblet, and the old housekeeper in the background arranged some biscuits.

“Fair women, blonds,” said Camille, “have the advantage over us poor brown things of a precious diversity; there are a hundred ways for a blonde to charm, and only one for a brunette. Besides, blondes are more womanly; we are too like men, we French brunettes--Well, well!” she cried, “pray don’t fall in love with Beatrix from the portrait I am making of her, like that prince, I forget his name, in the Arabian Nights. You would be too late, my dear boy.”

These words were said pointedly. The admiration depicted on the young man’s face was more for the picture than for the painter whose faire was failing of its purpose. As she spoke, Felicite was employing all the resources of her eloquent physiognomy.

“Blond as she is, however,” she went on, “Beatrix has not the grace of her color; her lines are severe; she is elegant, but hard; her face has a harsh contour, though at times it reveals a soul with Southern passions; an angel flashes out and then expires. Her eyes are thirsty. She looks best when seen full face; the profile has an air of being squeezed between two doors. You will see if I am mistaken. I will tell you now what made us intimate friends. For three years, from 1828 to 1831, Beatrix, while enjoying the last fetes of the Restoration, making the round of the salons, going to court, taking part in the fancy-balls of the Elysee-Bourbon, was all the while judging men, and things, events, and life itself, from the height of her own thought. Her mind was busy. These first years of the bewilderment the world caused her prevented her heart from waking up. From 1830 to 1831 she spent the time of the revolutionary disturbance at her husband’s country-place, where she was bored like a saint in paradise. On her return to Paris she became convinced, perhaps justly, that the revolution of July, in the minds of some persons purely political, would prove to be a moral revolution. The social class to which she belonged, not being able, during its unhoped-for triumph in the fifteen years of the Restoration to reconstruct itself, was about to go to pieces, bit by bit, under the battering-ram of the bourgeoisie. She heard the famous words of Monsieur Laine: ‘Kings are departing!’ This conviction, I believe was not without its influence on her conduct. She took an intellectual part in the new doctrines, which swarmed, during the three years succeeding July, 1830, like gnats in the sunshine, and turned some female heads. But, like all nobles, Beatrix, while thinking these novel ideals superb, wanted always to protect the nobility. Finding before long that there was no place in this new regime for individual superiority, seeing that the higher nobility were beginning once more the mute opposition it had formerly made to Napoleon,--which was, in truth, its wisest course under an empire of deeds and facts, but which in an epoch of moral causes was equivalent to abdication,--she chose personal happiness rather than such eclipse. About the time we were all beginning to breathe again, Beatrix met at my house a man with whom I had expected to end my days,--Gennaro Conti, the great composer, a man of Neapolitan origin, though born in Marseilles. Conti has a brilliant mind; as a composer he has talent, though he will never attain to the first rank. Without Rossini, without Meyerbeer, he might perhaps have been taken for a man of genius. He has one advantage over those men,--he is in vocal music what Paganini is on the violin, Liszt on the piano, Taglioni in the ballet, and what the famous Garat was; at any rate he recalls that great singer to those who knew him. His is not a voice, my friend, it is a soul. When its song replies to certain ideas, certain states of feeling difficult to describe in which a woman sometimes finds herself, that woman is lost. The marquise conceived the maddest passion for him, and took him from me. The act was provincial, I allow, but it was all fair play. She won my esteem and friendship by the way she behaved to me. She thought me a woman who was likely to defend her own; she did not know that to me the most ridiculous thing in the world is such a struggle. She came to see me. That woman, proud as she is, was so in love that she told me her secret and made me the arbiter of her destiny. She was really adorable, and she kept her place as woman and as marquise in my eyes. I must tell you, dear friend, that while women are sometimes bad, they have hidden grandeurs in their souls that men can never appreciate. Well, as I seem to be making my last will and testament like a woman on the verge of old age, I shall tell you that I was ever faithful to Conti, and should have been till death, and yet I know him. His nature is charming, apparently, and detestable beneath its surface. He is a charlatan in matters of the heart. There are some men, like Nathan, of whom I have already spoken to you, who are charlatans externally, and yet honest. Such men lie to themselves. Mounted on their stilts, they think they are on their feet, and perform their jugglery with a sort of innocence; their humbuggery is in their blood; they are born comedians, braggarts; extravagant in form as a Chinese vase; perhaps they even laugh at themselves. Their personality is generous; like Murat’s kingly garments, it attracts danger. But Conti’s duplicity will be known only to the women who love him. In his art he has that deep Italian jealousy which led the Carlone to murder Piola, and stuck a stiletto into Paesiello. That terrible envy lurks beneath the warmest comradeship. Conti has not the courage of his vice; he smiles at Meyerbeer and flatters him, when he fain would tear him to bits. He knows his weakness, and cultivates an appearance of sincerity; his vanity still further leads him to play at sentiments which are far indeed from his real heart. He represents himself as an artist who receives his inspirations from heaven; Art is something saintly and sacred to him; he is fanatic; he is sublime in his contempt for worldliness; his eloquence seems to come from the deepest convictions. He is a seer, a demon, a god, an angel. Calyste, although I warn you about him, you will be his dupe. That Southern nature, that impassioned artist is cold as a well-rope. Listen to him: the artist is a missionary. Art is a religion, which has its priests and ought to have its martyrs. Once started on that theme, Gennaro reaches the most dishevelled pathos that any German professor of philosophy ever spluttered to his audience. You admire his convictions, but he hasn’t any. Bearing his hearers to heaven on a song which seems a mysterious fluid shedding love, he casts an ecstatic glance upon them; he is examining their enthusiasm; he is asking himself: ‘Am I really a god to them?’ and he is also thinking: ‘I ate too much macaroni to-day.’ He is insatiable of applause, and he wins it. He delights, he is beloved; he is admired whensoever he will. He owes his success more to his voice than to his talent as a composer, though he would rather be a man of genius like Rossini than a performer like Rubini. I had committed the folly of attaching myself to him, and I was determined and resigned to deck this idol to the end. Conti, like a great many artists, is dainty in all his ways; he likes his ease, his enjoyments; he is always carefully, even elegantly dressed. I do respect his courage; he is brave; bravery, they say, is the only virtue into which hypocrisy cannot enter. While we were travelling I saw his courage tested; he risked the life he loved; and yet, strange contradiction! I have seen him, in Paris, commit what I call the cowardice of thought. My friend, all this was known to me. I said to the poor marquise: ‘You don’t know into what a gulf you are plunging. You are the Perseus of a poor Andromeda; you release me from my rock. If he loves you, so much the better! but I doubt it; he loves no one but himself.’ Gennaro was transported to the seventh heaven of pride. I was not a marquise, I was not born a Casteran, and he forgot me in a day. I then gave myself the savage pleasure of probing that nature to the bottom. Certain of the result, I wanted to see the twistings and turnings Conti would perform. My dear child, I saw in one week actual horrors of sham sentiment, infamous buffooneries of feeling. I will not tell you about them; you shall see the man here in a day or two. He now knows that I know him, and he hates me accordingly. If he could stab me with safety to himself I shouldn’t be alive two seconds. I have never said one word of all this to Beatrix. The last and constant insult Gennaro offers me is to suppose that I am capable of communicating my sad knowledge of him to her; but he has no belief in the good feeling of any human being. Even now he is playing a part with me; he is posing as a man who is wretched at having left me. You will find what I may call the most penetrating cordiality about him; he is winning; he is chivalrous. To him, all women are madonnas. One must live with him long before we get behind the veil of this false chivalry and learn the invisible signs of his humbug. His tone of conviction about himself might almost deceive the Deity. You will be entrapped, my dear child, by his catlike manners, and you will never believe in the profound and rapid arithmetic of his inmost thought. But enough; let us leave him. I pushed indifference so far as to receive them together in my house. This circumstance kept that most perspicacious of all societies, the great world of Paris, ignorant of the affair. Though intoxicated with pride, Gennaro was compelled to dissimulate; and he did it admirably. But violent passions will have their freedom at any cost. Before the end of the year, Beatrix whispered in my ear one evening: ‘My dear Felicite, I start to-morrow for Italy with Conti.’ I was not surprised; she regarded herself as united for life to Gennaro, and she suffered from the restraints imposed upon her; she escaped one evil by rushing into a greater. Conti was wild with happiness,--the happiness of vanity alone. ‘That’s what it is to love truly,’ he said to me. ‘How many women are there who would sacrifice their lives, their fortune, their reputation?’--‘Yes, she loves you,’ I replied, ‘but you do not love her.’ He was furious, and made me a scene; he stormed, he declaimed, he depicted his love, declaring that he had never supposed it possible to love as much. I remained impassible, and lent him money for his journey, which, being unexpected, found him unprepared. Beatrix left a letter for her husband and started the next day for Italy. There she has remained two years; she has written to me several times, and her letters are enchanting. The poor child attaches herself to me as the only woman who will comprehend her. She says she adores me. Want of money has compelled Gennaro to accept an offer to write a French opera; he does not find in Italy the pecuniary gains which composers obtain in Paris. Here’s the letter I received yesterday from Beatrix. Take it and read it; you can now understand it,--that is, if it is possible, at your age, to analyze the things of the heart.”

So saying, she held out the letter to him.

At this moment Claude Vignon entered the room. At his unexpected apparition Calyste and Felicite were both silent for a moment,--she from surprise, he from a vague uneasiness. The vast forehead, broad and high, of the new-comer, who was bald at the age of thirty-seven, now seemed darkened by annoyance. His firm, judicial mouth expressed a habit of chilling sarcasm. Claude Vignon is imposing, in spite of the precocious deteriorations of a face once magnificent, and now grown haggard. Between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five he strongly resembled the divine Raffaelle. But his nose, that feature of the human face that changes most, is growing to a point; the countenance is sinking into mysterious depressions, the outlines are thickening; leaden tones predominate in the complexion, giving tokens of weariness, although the fatigues of this young man are not apparent; perhaps some bitter solitude has aged him, or the abuse of his gift of comprehension. He scrutinizes the thought of every one, yet without definite aim or system. The pickaxe of his criticism demolishes, it never constructs. Thus his lassitude is that of a mechanic, not of an architect. The eyes, of a pale blue, once brilliant, are clouded now by some hidden pain, or dulled by gloomy sadness. Excesses have laid dark tints above the eyelids; the temples have lost their freshness. The chin, of incomparable distinction, is getting doubled, but without dignity. His voice, never sonorous, is weakening; without being either hoarse or extinct, it touches the confines of hoarseness and extinction. The impassibility of that fine head, the fixity of that glance, cover irresolution and weakness, which the keenly intelligent and sarcastic smile belies. The weakness lies wholly in action, not in thought; there are traces of an encyclopedic comprehension on that brow, and in the habitual movement of a face that is childlike and splendid both. The man is tall, slightly bent already, like all those who bear the weight of a world of thought. Such long, tall bodies are never remarkable for continuous effort or creative activity. Charlemagne, Belisarious, and Constantine are noted exceptions to this rule.

Certainly Claude Vignon presents a variety of mysteries to be solved. In the first place, he is very simple and very wily. Though he falls into excesses with the readiness of a courtesan, his powers of thought remain untouched. Yet his intellect, which is competent to criticise art, science, literature, and politics, is incompetent to guide his external life. Claude contemplates himself within the domain of his intellectual kingdom, and abandons his outer man with Diogenic indifference. Satisfied to penetrate all, to comprehend all by thought, he despises materialities; and yet, if it becomes a question of creating, doubt assails him; he sees obstacles, he is not inspired by beauties, and while he is debating means, he sits with his arms pendant, accomplishing nothing. He is the Turk of the intellect made somnolent by meditation. Criticism is his opium; his harem of books to read disgusts him with real work. Indifferent to small things as well as great things, he is sometimes compelled, by the very weight of his head, to fall into a debauch, and abdicate for a few hours the fatal power of omnipotent analysis. He is far too preoccupied with the wrong side of genius, and Camille Maupin’s desire to put him back on the right side is easily conceivable. The task was an attractive one. Claude Vignon thinks himself a great politician as well as a great writer; but this unpublished Machiavelli laughs within himself at all ambitions; he knows what he can do; he has instinctively taken the measure of his future on his faculties; he sees his greatness, but he also sees obstacles, grows alarmed or disgusted, lets the time roll by, and does not go to work. Like Etienne Lousteau the feuilletonist, like Nathan the dramatic author, like Blondet, another journalist, he came from the ranks of the bourgeoisie, to which we owe the greater number of our writers.

“Which way did you come?” asked Mademoiselle des Touches, coloring with either pleasure or surprise.’

“By the door,” replied Claude Vignon, dryly.

“Oh,” she cried, shrugging her shoulders, “I am aware that you are not a man to climb in by a window.”

“Scaling a window is a badge of honor for a beloved woman.”

“Enough!” said Felicite.

“Am I in the way?” asked Claude.

“Monsieur,” said Calyste, artlessly, “this letter--”

“Pray keep it; I ask no questions; at our age we understand such affairs,” he answered, interrupting Calyste with a sardonic air.

“But, monsieur,” began Calyste, much provoked.

“Calm yourself, young man; I have the utmost indulgence for sentiments.”

“My dear Calyste,” said Camille, wishing to speak.

“‘Dear’?” said Vignon, interrupting her.

“Claude is joking,” said Camille, continuing her remarks to Calyste. “He is wrong to do it with you, who know nothing of Parisian ways.”

“I did not know that I was joking,” said Claude Vignon, very gravely.

“Which way did you come?” asked Felicite again. “I have been watching the road to Croisic for the last two hours.”

“Not all the time,” replied Vignon.

“You are too bad to jest in this way.”

“Am I jesting?”

Calyste rose.

“Why should you go so soon? You are certainly at your ease here,” said Vignon.

“Quite the contrary,” replied the angry young Breton, to whom Camille Maupin stretched out a hand, which he took and kissed, dropping a tear upon it, after which he took his leave.

“I should like to be that little young man,” said the critic, sitting down, and taking one end of the hookah. “How he will love!”

“Too much; for then he will not be loved in return,” replied Mademoiselle des Touches. “Madame de Rochefide is coming here,” she added.

“You don’t say so!” exclaimed Claude. “With Conti?”

“She will stay here alone, but he accompanies her.”

“Have they quarrelled?”

“No.”

“Play me a sonata of Beethoven’s; I know nothing of the music he wrote for the piano.”

Claude began to fill the tube of the hookah with Turkish tobacco, all the while examining Camille much more attentively than she observed. A dreadful thought oppressed him; he fancied he was being used for a blind by this woman. The situation was a novel one.

Calyste went home thinking no longer of Beatrix de Rochefide and her letter; he was furious against Claude Vignon for what he considered the utmost indelicacy, and he pitied poor Felicite. How was it possible to be beloved by that sublime creature and not adore her on his knees, not believe her on the faith of a glance or a smile? He felt a desire to turn and rend that cold, pale spectre of a man. Ignorant he might be, as Felicite had told him, of the tricks of thought of the jesters of the press, but one thing he knew--Love was the human religion.

When his mother saw him entering the court-yard she uttered an exclamation of joy, and Zephirine whistled for Mariotte.

“Mariotte, the boy is coming! cook the fish!”

“I see him, mademoiselle,” replied the woman.

Fanny, uneasy at the sadness she saw on her son’s brow, picked up her worsted-work; the old aunt took out her knitting. The baron gave his arm-chair to his son and walked about the room, as if to stretch his legs before going out to take a turn in the garden. No Flemish or Dutch picture ever presented an interior in tones more mellow, peopled with faces and forms so harmoniously blending. The handsome young man in his black velvet coat, the mother, still so beautiful, and the aged brother and sister framed by that ancient hall, were a moving domestic harmony.

Fanny would fain have questioned Calyste, but he had already pulled a letter from his pocket,--that letter of the Marquise Beatrix, which was, perhaps, destined to destroy the happiness of this noble family. As he unfolded it, Calyste’s awakened imagination showed him the marquise dressed as Camille Maupin had fancifully depicted her.

From the Marquise de Rochefide to Mademoiselle des Touches.

Genoa, July 2.

I have not written to you since our stay in Florence, my dear friend, for Venice and Rome have absorbed my time, and, as you know, happiness occupies a large part of life; so far, we have neither of us dropped from its first level. I am a little fatigued; for when one has a soul not easy to blaser, the constant succession of enjoyments naturally causes lassitude.

Our friend has had a magnificent triumph at the Scala and the Fenice, and now at the San Carlo. Three Italian operas in two years! You cannot say that love has made him idle. We have been warmly received everywhere,--though I myself would have preferred solitude and silence. Surely that is the only suitable manner of life for women who have placed themselves in direct opposition to society? I expected such a life; but love, my dear friend, is a more exacting master than marriage,--however, it is sweet to obey him; though I did not think I should have to see the world again, even by snatches, and the attentions I receive are so many stabs. I am no longer on a footing of equality with the highest rank of women; and the more attentions are paid to me, the more my inferiority is made apparent.

Gennaro could not comprehend this sensitiveness; but he has been so happy that it would ill become me not to have sacrificed my petty vanity to that great and noble thing,--the life of an artist. We women live by love, whereas men live by love and action; otherwise they would not be men. Still, there are great disadvantages for a woman in the position in which I have put myself. You have escaped them; you continue to be a person in the eyes of the world, which has no rights over you; you have your own free will, and I have lost mine. I am speaking now of the things of the heart, not those of social life, which I have utterly renounced. You can be coquettish and self-willed, and have all the graces of a woman who loves, a woman who can give or refuse her love as she pleases; you have kept the right to have caprices, in the interests even of your love. In short, to-day you still possess your right of feeling, while I, I have no longer any liberty of heart, which I think precious to exercise in love, even though the love itself may be eternal. I have no right now to that privilege of quarrelling in jest to which so many women cling, and justly; for is it not the plummet line with which to sound the hearts of men? I have no threat at my command. I must draw my power henceforth from obedience, from unlimited gentleness; I must make myself imposing by the greatness of my love. I would rather die than leave Gennaro, and my pardon lies in the sanctity of my love. Between social dignity and my petty personal dignity, I did right not to hesitate. If at times I have a few melancholy feelings, like clouds that pass through a clear blue sky, and to which all women like to yield themselves, I keep silence about them; they might seem like regrets. Ah me! I have so fully understood the obligations of my position that I have armed myself with the utmost indulgence; but so far, Gennaro has not alarmed my susceptible jealousy. I don’t as yet see where that dear great genius may fail.

Dear angel, I am like those pious souls who argue with their God, for are not you my Providence? do I not owe my happiness to you? You must never doubt, therefore, that you are constantly in my thoughts.

I have seen Italy at last; seen it as you saw it, and as it ought to be seen,--lighted to our souls by love, as it is by its own bright sun and its masterpieces. I pity those who, being moved to adoration at every step, have no hand to press, no heart in which to shed the exuberance of emotions which calm themselves when shared. These two years have been to me a lifetime, in which my memory has stored rich harvests. Have you made plans, as I do, to stay forever at Chiavari, to buy a palazzo in Venice, a summer-house at Sorrento, a villa in Florence? All loving women dread society; but I, who am cast forever outside of it, ought I not to bury myself in some beautiful landscape, on flowery slopes, facing the sea, or in a valley that equals a sea, like that of Fiesole?

But alas! we are only poor artists, and want of money is bringing these two bohemians back to Paris. Gennaro does not want me to feel that I have lost my luxury, and he wishes to put his new work, a grand opera, into rehearsal at once. You will understand, of course, my dearest, that I cannot set foot in Paris. I could not, I would not, even if it costs me my love, meet one of those glances of women, or of men, which would make me think of murder or suicide. Yes, I could hack in pieces whoever insulted me with pity; like Chateauneuf, who, in the time of Henri III., I think, rode his horse at the Provost of Paris for a wrong of that kind, and trampled him under hoof.

I write, therefore, to say that I shall soon pay you a visit at Les Touches. I want to stay there, in that Chartreuse, while awaiting the success of our Gennaro’s opera. You will see that I am bold with my benefactress, my sister; but I prove, at any rate, that the greatness of obligations laid upon me has not led me, as it does so many people, to ingratitude. You have told me so much of the difficulties of the land journey that I shall go to Croisic by water. This idea came to me on finding that there is a little Danish vessel now here, laden with marble, which is to touch at Croisic for a cargo of salt on its way back to the Baltic. I shall thus escape the fatigue and the cost of the land journey. Dear Felicite, you are the only person with whom I could be alone without Conti. Will it not be some pleasure to have a woman with you who understands your heart as fully as you do hers?

Adieu, a bientot. The wind is favorable, and I set sail, wafting you a kiss.

Beatrix.

“Ah! she loves, too!” thought Calyste, folding the letter sadly.

That sadness flowed to the heart of the mother as if some gleam had lighted up a gulf to her. The baron had gone out; Fanny went to the door of the tower and pushed the bolt, then she returned, and leaned upon the back of her boy’s chair, like the sister of Dido in Guerin’s picture, and said,--

“What is it, my Calyste? what makes you so sad? You promised to explain to me these visits to Les Touches; I am to bless its mistress,--at least, you said so.”

“Yes, indeed you will, dear mother,” he replied. “She has shown me the insufficiency of my education at an epoch when the nobles ought to possess a personal value in order to give life to their rank. I was as far from the age we live in as Guerande is from Paris. She has been, as it were, the mother of my intellect.”

“I cannot bless her for that,” said the baroness, with tears in her eyes.

“Mamma!” cried Calyste, on whose forehead those hot tears fell, two pearls of sorrowful motherhood, “mamma, don’t weep! Just now, when I wanted to do her a service, and search the country round, she said, ‘It will make your mother so uneasy.’”

“Did she say that? Then I can forgive her many things,” replied Fanny.

“Felicite thinks only of my good,” continued Calyste. “She often checks the lively, venturesome language of artists so as not to shake me in a faith which is, though she knows it not, unshakable. She has told me of the life in Paris of several young men of the highest nobility coming from their provinces, as I might do,--leaving families without fortune, but obtaining in Paris, by the power of their will and their intellect, a great career. I can do what the Baron de Rastignac, now a minister of State, has done. Felicite has taught me; I read with her; she gives me lessons on the piano; she is teaching me Italian; she has initiated me into a thousand social secrets, about which no one in Guerande knows anything at all. She could not give me the treasures of her love, but she has given me those of her vast intellect, her mind, her genius. She does not want to be a pleasure, but a light to me; she lessens not one of my faiths; she herself has faith in the nobility, she loves Brittany, she--”

“She has changed our Calyste,” said his blind old aunt, interrupting him. “I do not understand one word he has been saying. You have a solid roof over your head, my good nephew; you have parents and relations who adore you, and faithful servants; you can marry some good little Breton girl, religious and accomplished, who will make you happy. Reserve your ambitions for your eldest son, who may be four times as rich as you, if you choose to live tranquilly, thriftily, in obscurity,--but in the peace of God,--in order to release the burdens on your estate. It is all as simple as a Breton heart. You will be, not so rapidly perhaps, but more solidly, a rich nobleman.”

“Your aunt is right, my darling; she plans for your happiness with as much anxiety as I do myself. If I do not succeed in marrying you to my niece, Margaret, the daughter of your uncle, Lord Fitzwilliam, it is almost certain that Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel will leave her fortune to whichever of her nieces you may choose.”

“And besides, there’s a little gold to be found here,” added the old aunt in a low voice, with a mysterious glance about her.

“Marry! at my age!” he said, casting on his mother one of those looks which melt the arguments of mothers. “Am I to live without my beautiful fond loves? Must I never tremble or throb or fear or gasp, or lie beneath implacable looks and soften them? Am I never to know beauty in its freedom, the fantasy of the soul, the clouds that course through the azure of happiness, which the breath of pleasure dissipates? Ah! shall I never wander in those sweet by-paths moist with dew; never stand beneath the drenching of a gutter and not know it rains, like those lovers seen by Diderot; never take, like the Duc de Lorraine, a live coal in my hand? Are there no silken ladders for me, no rotten trellises to cling to and not fall? Shall I know nothing of woman but conjugal submission; nothing of love but the flame of its lamp-wick? Are my longings to be satisfied before they are roused? Must I live out my days deprived of that madness of the heart that makes a man and his power? Would you make me a married monk? No! I have eaten of the fruit of Parisian civilization. Do you not see that you have, by the ignorant morals of this family, prepared the fire that consumes me, that will consume me utterly, unless I can adore the divineness I see everywhere,--in those sands gleaming in the sun, in the green foliage, in all the women, beautiful, noble, elegant, pictured in the books and in the poems I have read with Camille? Alas! there is but one such woman in Guerande, and it is you, my mother! The birds of my beautiful dream, they come from Paris, they fly from the pages of Scott, of Byron,--Parisina, Effie, Minna! yes, and that royal duchess, whom I saw on the moors among the furze and the ferns, whose very aspect sent the blood to my heart.”

The baroness saw these thoughts flaming in the eyes of her son, clearer, more beautiful, more living than art can tell to those who read them. She grasped them rapidly, flung to her as they were in glances like arrows from an upset quiver. Without having read Beaumarchais, she felt, as other women would have felt, that it would be a crime to marry Calyste.

“Oh! my child!” she said, taking him in her arms, and kissing the beautiful hair that was still hers, “marry whom you will, and when you will, but be happy! My part in life is not to hamper you.”

Mariotte came to lay the table. Gasselin was out exercising Calyste’s horse, which the youth had not mounted for two months. The three women, mother, aunt, and Mariotte, shared in the tender feminine wiliness, which taught them to make much of Calyste when he dined at home. Breton plainness fought against Parisian luxury, now brought to the very doors of Guerande. Mariotte endeavored to wean her young master from the accomplished service of Camille Maupin’s kitchen, just as his mother and aunt strove to hold him in the net of their tenderness and render all comparison impossible.

“There’s a salmon-trout for dinner, Monsieur Calyste, and snipe, and pancakes such as I know you can’t get anywhere but here,” said Mariotte, with a sly, triumphant look as she smoothed the cloth, a cascade of snow.

After dinner, when the old aunt had taken up her knitting, and the rector and Monsieur du Halga had arrived, allured by their precious mouche, Calyste went back to Les Touches on the pretext of returning the letter.

Claude Vignon and Felicite were still at table. The great critic was something of a gourmand, and Felicite pampered the vice, knowing how indispensable a woman makes herself by such compliance. The dinner-table presented that rich and brilliant aspect which modern luxury, aided by the perfecting of handicrafts, now gives to its service. The poor and noble house of Guenic little knew with what an adversary it was attempting to compete, or what amount of fortune was necessary to enter the lists against the silverware, the delicate porcelain, the beautiful linen, the silver-gilt service brought from Paris by Mademoiselle des Touches, and the science of her cook. Calyste declined the liqueurs contained in one of those superb cases of precious woods, which are something like tabernacles.

“Here’s the letter,” he said, with innocent ostentation, looking at Claude, who was slowly sipping a glass of liqueur-des-iles.

“Well, what did you think of it?” asked Mademoiselle des Touches, throwing the letter across the table to Vignon, who began to read it, taking up and putting down at intervals his little glass.

“I thought--well, that Parisian women were very fortunate to have men of genius to adore who adore them.”

“Ah! you are still in your village,” said Felicite, laughing. “What! did you not see that she loves him less, and--”

“That is evident,” said Claude Vignon, who had only read the first page. “Do people reason on their situation when they really love; are they as shrewd as the marquise, as observing, as discriminating? Your dear Beatrix is held to Conti now by pride only; she is condemned to love him quand meme.”

“Poor woman!” said Camille.

Calyste’s eyes were fixed on the table; he saw nothing about him. The beautiful woman in the fanciful dress described that morning by Felicite appeared to him crowned with light; she smiled to him, she waved her fan; the other hand, issuing from its ruffle of lace, fell white and pure on the heavy folds of her crimson velvet robe.

“She is just the thing for you,” said Claude Vignon, smiling sardonically at Calyste.

The young man was deeply wounded by the words, and by the manner in which they were said.

“Don’t put such ideas into Calyste’s mind; you don’t know how dangerous such jokes may prove to be,” said Mademoiselle des Touches, hastily. “I know Beatrix, and there is something too grandiose in her nature to allow her to change. Besides, Conti will be here.”

“Ha!” said Claude Vignon, satirically, “a slight touch of jealousy, eh?”

“Can you really think so?” said Camille, haughtily.

“You are more perspicacious than a mother,” replied Claude Vignon, still sarcastically.

“But it would be impossible,” said Camille, looking at Calyste.

“They are very well matched,” remarked Vignon. “She is ten years older than he; and it is he who appears to be the girl--”

“A girl, monsieur,” said Calyste, waking from his reverie, “who has been twice under fire in La Vendee! If the Cause had had twenty thousand more such girls--”

“I was giving you some well-deserved praise, and that is easier than to give you a beard,” remarked Vignon.

“I have a sword for those who wear their beards too long,” cried Calyste.

“And I am very good at an epigram,” said the other, smiling. “We are Frenchmen; the affair can easily be arranged.”

Mademoiselle des Touches cast a supplicating look on Calyste, which calmed him instantly.

“Why,” said Felicite, as if to break up the discussion, “do young men like my Calyste, begin by loving women of a certain age?”

“I don’t know any sentiment more artless or more generous,” replied Vignon. “It is the natural consequence of the adorable qualities of youth. Besides, how would old women end if it were not for such love? You are young and beautiful, and will be for twenty years to come, so I can speak of this matter before you,” he added, with a keen look at Mademoiselle des Touches. “In the first place the semi-dowagers, to whom young men pay their first court, know much better how to make love than younger women. An adolescent youth is too like a young woman himself for a young woman to please him. Such a passion trenches on the fable of Narcissus. Besides that feeling of repugnance, there is, as I think, a mutual sense of inexperience which separates them. The reason why the hearts of young women are only understood by mature men, who conceal their cleverness under a passion real or feigned, is precisely the same (allowing for the difference of minds) as that which renders a woman of a certain age more adroit in attracting youth. A young man feels that he is sure to succeed with her, and the vanities of the woman are flattered by his suit. Besides, isn’t it natural for youth to fling itself on fruits? The autumn of a woman’s life offers many that are very toothsome,--those looks, for instance, bold, and yet reserved, bathed with the last rays of love, so warm, so sweet; that all-wise elegance of speech, those magnificent shoulders, so nobly developed, the full and undulating outline, the dimpled hands, the hair so well arranged, so cared for, that charming nape of the neck, where all the resources of art are displayed to exhibit the contrast between the hair and the flesh-tones, and to set in full relief the exuberance of life and love. Brunettes themselves are fair at such times, with the amber colors of maturity. Besides, such women reveal in their smiles and display in their words a knowledge of the world; they know how to converse; they can call up the whole of social life to make a lover laugh; their dignity and their pride are stupendous; or, in other moods, they can utter despairing cries which touch his soul, farewells of love which they take care to render useless, and only make to intensify his passion. Their devotions are absolute; they listen to us; they love us; they catch, they cling to love as a man condemned to death clings to the veriest trifles of existence,--in short, love, absolute love, is known only through them. I think such women can never be forgotten by a man, any more than he can forget what is grand and sublime. A young woman has a thousand distractions; these women have none. No longer have they self-love, pettiness, or vanity; their love--it is the Loire at its mouth, it is vast, it is swelled by all the illusions, all the affluents of life, and this is why--but my muse is dumb,” he added, observing the ecstatic attitude of Mademoiselle des Touches, who was pressing Calyste’s hand with all her strength, perhaps to thank him for having been the occasion of such a moment, of such an eulogy, so lofty that she did not see the trap that it laid for her.

During the rest of the evening Claude Vignon and Felicite sparkled with wit and happy sayings; they told anecdotes, and described Parisian life to Calyste, who was charmed with Claude, for mind has immense seductions for persons who are all heart.

“I shouldn’t be surprised to see the Marquise de Rochefide and Conti, who, of course, will accompany her, at the landing-place to-morrow,” said Claude Vignon, as the evening ended. “When I was at Croisic this afternoon, the fishermen were saying that they had seen a little vessel, Danish, Swedish, or Norwegian, in the offing.”

This speech brought a flush to the cheeks of the impassible Camille.

Again Madame du Guenic sat up till one o’clock that night, waiting for her son, unable to imagine why he should stay so late if Mademoiselle des Touches did not love him.

“He must be in their way,” said this adorable mother. “What were you talking about?” she asked, when at last he came in.

“Oh, mother, I have never before spent such a delightful evening. Genius is a great, a sublime thing! Why didn’t you give me genius? With genius we can make our lives, we can choose among all women the woman to love, and she must be ours.”

“How handsome you are, my Calyste!”

“Claude Vignon is handsome. Men of genius have luminous foreheads and eyes, through which the lightnings flash--but I, alas! I know nothing--only to love.”

“They say that suffices, my angel,” she said, kissing him on the forehead.

“Do you believe it?”

“They say so, but I have never known it.”

Calyste kissed his mother’s hand as if it was a sacred thing.

“I will love you for all those that would have adored you,” he said.

“Dear child! perhaps it is a little bit your duty to do so, for you inherit my nature. But, Calyste, do not be unwise, imprudent; try to love only noble women, if love you must.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
What young man full of restrained life and emotion would not think of going to Croisic to see Madame de Rochefide land, and to examine her incognito? Calyste surprised his parents by going off in the morning without waiting for breakfast. His feet moved with an almost unknown agility; he kept close to the walls of Les Touches lest he be seen. He was ashamed of his ardor and afraid of being laughed at; Felicite and Vignon were so perspicacious! Young men fancy their foreheads transparent.

He reached the shore, strengthened by a stone embankment, in front of a shelter for when tide and weather made the crossing to Croisic impossible. Two boats came from Croisic, laden with baggage—trunks, packages, chests—whose look told a native they belonged to travellers of distinction. In one boat was a maid in a straw bonnet with a green veil and a man; it proved to be only a maid and a footman.

“Are you going over to Croisic, Monsieur Calyste?” asked a boatman; Calyste, annoyed at being called by name, shook his head.

He was captivated by a chest covered with tarred cloth labeled MME. LA MARQUISE DE ROCHEFIDE. The name shone before him like a talisman; he fancied there was something fateful in it. In the desert of his newly awakened desires his fancy fastened on the first woman presented. Beatrix thus inherited the love Camille had rejected.

As the luggage landed Calyste glanced toward Croisic for another boat that might show him Beatrix—already the marble statue on which to hang his garlands. He stood with arms folded, lost in meditation. Remarkably, we often subject ourselves to sentiments by our own volition, deliberately bind ourselves; chance has less to do with it than we think.

“Are you expecting someone to meet you?” the maid asked.

“We were told they would fetch us from Les Touches. If they don’t come,” she added, “I don’t know how Madame la marquise will manage to dress for dinner. You had better go and find Mademoiselle des Touches. Oh! what a land of savages!”

Calyste felt he had blundered.

“Is your mistress going to Les Touches?” he inquired.

“She is there; Mademoiselle came for her this morning at seven o’clock. Ah! here come the horses.”

Calyste started toward Guerande with the lightness of a chamois, doubling to avoid retracing his steps or meeting servants of Les Touches. He met two of them on the narrow causeway through the marsh.

“Shall I go in, or shall I not?” he thought when the pines of Les Touches came in sight. He was afraid, and continued to Guerande, where he finished his excursion on the mall and reflected.

“She has no idea of my agitation,” he said to himself.

His capricious thoughts were grapnels fastening his heart to the marquise. He had known none of these mysterious terrors and joys with Camille. Such vague emotions rise like poems in the untutored soul. Warmed by the first fires of imagination, souls like his pass through preparation and may reach in silence the heights of love without having met the object of their efforts.

Presently Calyste saw the Chevalier du Halga and Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel walking together on the mall. He heard them say his name and slipped aside to listen. The chevalier advised Pen-Hoel, if Charlotte de Kergarouet came, to keep her four or five months so the girl might fall in love with Calyste by daily contact, allowing them to marry next winter. “If you say two words about it to Charlotte she’ll say four to Calyste,” he added; “a girl of sixteen can certainly carry off the prize from a woman of forty.”

The old people turned away and Calyste heard no more. Remembering what his mother had told him, he saw Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel’s intention. The idea of a girl thus imposed upon him sent him with greater ardor into his imaginary love. He had never fancied Charlotte; he now felt repugnance at the thought. Calyste, raised in modest means and accustomed to restrained life, cared little for fortune; his thoughts belonged to the marquise. What was that little Charlotte beside the portrait Camille had drawn—more a sister than a rival?

He did not return home until five. His mother handed him a letter from Mademoiselle des Touches:

  My dear Calyste,—The beautiful marquise has come; we count on you to help us celebrate her arrival. Claude, always sarcastic, declares that you will play Bice and that she will be Dante. It is for our honor as Bretons, and yours as a du Guenic to welcome a Casteran. Come soon.
  Your friend, Camille Maupin.
  Come as you are, without ceremony; otherwise you will put us to the blush.

Calyste gave the letter to his mother and departed.

“Who are the Casterans?” said Fanny to the baron.

“An old Norman family, allied to William the Conqueror,” he replied. “They bear on a shield tierce fessed azure, gules and sable, a horse rearing argent, shod with gold. That beautiful creature for whom the Gars was killed at Fougeres in 1800 was the daughter of a Casteran who made herself a nun and became an abbess after the Duc de Verneuil deserted her.”

“And the Rochefides?”

“I don’t know that name. I should have to see the blazon,” he replied.

The baroness was somewhat reassured that the Marquise de Rochefide was of noble birth, but she felt her son exposed to new seductions.

Calyste walked along with violent yet soft inward movements; his throat was tight, his heart swelled, his brain was full, fever possessing him. He tried to walk slowly, but some superior power hurried him. Such impetuosity is common in young men: a subtle fire makes Nature and woman seem radiant.

He found the company assembled in Camille’s little salon. It was about six; the setting sun cast a ruddy light chequered by trees; twilight, beloved of women, spread through the room.

“Here comes the future deputy of Brittany,” said Camille as Calyste raised the tapestry portiere—“punctual as a king.”

“You recognized his step just now,” said Claude to Felicite in a low voice.

Calyste bowed low to the marquise, who inclined her head; he did not look at her but took the hand Claude Vignon held out and pressed it.

“This is the celebrated man of whom we have talked so much, Gennaro Conti,” said Camille, not replying to Claude’s remark.

She presented a man of medium height, thin, with chestnut hair, eyes almost red, and a freckled white skin, whose head so resembled Lord Byron’s that description seemed superfluous. Conti was proud of the resemblance.

“I am fortunate,” he said, “to meet Monsieur du Guenic during the one day that I spend at Les Touches.”

“It was for me to say that to you,” Calyste replied with a certain ease.

“He is handsome as an angel,” said the marquise in an undertone to Felicite.

Standing between the sofa and the two ladies, Calyste heard the words. He seated himself and looked furtively at the marquise. In the soft half-light he saw, reclining on a divan, a white serpentine shape that thrilled him. Felicite had done her friend a service; the marquise was much superior to Camille’s unflattering portrait. Had Beatrix wound blue-bells into her hair to set off her creped curls? The circles at her eyes, showing fatigue, were mother-of-pearl; her skin dazzled with fine blue veins. The delicacy of her features, diaphanous forehead, and long graceful neck lent many expressions. Her waist might be spanned by the hands; bare shoulders sparkled like a white camellia. A transparent fichu revealed the bosom's outline. A white muslin gown strewn with blue flowers, large sleeves, and shoes with crossed strings over stockings showed a charming knowledge of dress. Silver filigree ear-rings harmonized with the soft curls starred with blue-bells.

Calyste’s eager eye took in these beauties at a glance and carved them on his soul. The fair Beatrix and the dark Felicite might have sat for contrasting portraits: force and feebleness of womanhood in full development. In a moment—at first sight—Calyste was seized with a love that crowned his hopes and fears. Mademoiselle des Touches had awakened his nature; Beatrix inflamed heart and thought. He felt a sudden power to conquer; he looked at Conti with an envious, gloomy rivalry he’d never felt for Claude Vignon. He strove to control himself; the inward tempest fell as soon as Beatrix’s eyes turned to him and her soft voice sounded. Dinner was announced.

“Calyste, give your arm to the marquise,” said Camille, taking Conti with her right hand and Claude Vignon with her left, drawing back to let the marquise pass.

The descent of that ancient staircase was to Calyste like going into battle. His heart failed him; he had nothing to say; a slight sweat pearled on his forehead and wet his back; his arm trembled so that as they reached the lowest step the marquise asked, “Is anything the matter?”

“Oh!” he replied muffled, “I have never seen any woman so beautiful as you, except my mother, and I am not master of my emotions.”

“But you have Camille Maupin before your eyes.”

“Ah! what a difference!” said Calyste ingenuously.

“Calyste,” whispered Felicite behind him, “did I not tell you that you would forget me as if I had never existed? Sit there,” she said aloud, “beside the marquise, on her right, and you, Claude, on her left. As for you, Gennaro, I retain you by me; we will keep a mutual eye on their coquetries.”

Camille’s peculiar accept struck Claude Vignon, who observed her closely and never ceased to examine Mademoiselle des Touches during dinner.

“Coquetries!” replied the marquise, taking off her gloves and showing her beautiful hands; “the opportunity is good, with a poet,” and she motioned to Claude, “on one side, and poesy the other.”

At these words Conti turned and gave Calyste a flattering look.

By candlelight Beatrix seemed even more beautiful. The gleam made her forehead satiny, lit the spangles of her eyes, and turned her curls to gold. She threw back her thin gauze scarf, disclosing a beautiful nape and graceful neck—unlike Camille’s, the sign of another character.

Calyste had trouble pretending to eat; nervous motions deprived him of appetite. The ardor of the heart, restrained by moral reserve, led to inward conflict—the long respectful hesitations and tender debatings of the pure-hearted. Studying furtively the marquise’s beauty, Calyste felt oppressed by her majesty; dwarfed by the hauteur of certain glances, the imposing expression of an aristocratic face, and the pride women express in slight motions. The false position she had assumed forced an imposing manner—an art of the great world fatal to vulgar women.

Felicite’s eyes made Beatrix aware of the inward adoration she inspired in the youth beside her, and that it would be unworthy to encourage it. She now and then gave him repressive glances that fell upon his heart like an avalanche of snow. The unfortunate young fellow turned to Felicite with a look in which she could read the tears he was suppressing. She asked in a friendly tone why he ate nothing; the question piqued him and he forced himself to eat and take part in the conversation.

But Madame de Rochefide paid little attention to him. Mademoiselle des Touches, speaking wittily of her journey to Italy, related many incidents that made Claude Vignon, Conti, and Felicite laugh.

“How far such a woman is from me! Will she ever deign to notice me?” thought Calyste.

Camille was struck with his expression and tried to console him with a sympathetic look. Claude intercepted and became sarcastically gay, telling Beatrix that love existed only by desire; that most women deceived themselves in loving; that they loved for reasons unknown to men and often to themselves; that the best among them were artful.

“Keep to books, and don’t criticise our lives,” said Camille, glancing imperiously at him.

The dinner ceased to be gay. Claude’s sarcasm made the two women pensive. Calyste felt pain amid the happiness of looking at Beatrix. Conti searched the marquise’s eyes to guess her thoughts. When dinner was over, Mademoiselle des Touches took Calyste’s arm, gave the other two men to the marquise, and let them pass so she could be alone with the young Breton a moment.

“My dear Calyste,” she said, “you are acting in a manner that embarrasses the marquise; she may be delighted with your admiration, but she cannot accept it. Pray control yourself.”

“She was hard to me, she will never care for me,” said Calyste, “and if she does not I shall die.”

“Die! you! My dear Calyste, you are a child. Would you have died for me?”

“You have made yourself my friend,” he answered.

After coffee, Vignon asked Conti to sing. Camille sat at the piano. Together she and Gennaro sang the duet Dunque il mio bene tu mia sarai, the last duet of Zingarelli’s Romeo e Giulietta, a most pathetic modern page. The passage Di tanti palpiti expresses love in all its grandeur. Calyste, sitting in the same arm-chair in which Felicite had told him the story of the marquise, listened in rapt devotion. Beatrix and Vignon were on either side of the piano. Conti’s sublime voice blended with Felicite’s; both had often sung this piece and used all their gift. The music became a poem of divine melancholy, the farewell of two swans to life. When it was over, all present were under feelings that defy vulgar applause.

“Ah! music is the first of arts!” exclaimed the marquise.

“Camille thinks youth and beauty the first of poesies,” said Claude Vignon.

Mademoiselle des Touches looked at Claude with vague uneasiness. Beatrix, not seeing Calyste, turned to see the music’s effect—more for Conti’s sake than Calyste’s; she saw a white face bathed in tears. At the sight, and as if seized by sudden pain, she turned back quickly and looked at Gennaro. Music had arisen before Calyste, touching him until he stood in presence of creation. He was dumbfounded by Conti’s genius. Despite Camille’s warnings about the musician, Calyste believed now in the beauty of the soul expressed by such love. How could he rival such an artist? What woman could cease to adore that genius? That voice entered the soul like another soul.

The poor lad was overwhelmed by poesy and despair. He felt himself of no account; this ingenuous admission of his nothingness was readable on his face mingled with admiration. He did not observe the gesture with which Beatrix, moved by the contagion of a true feeling, called Felicite’s attention to him.

“Oh! the adorable heart!” cried Camille. “Conti, you will never obtain applause of one-half the value of that child’s homage. Let us sing this trio. Beatrix, my dear, come.”

When the marquise, Camille, and Conti arranged themselves at the piano, Calyste rose softly, flung himself on a sofa in the bedroom, whose door stood open, and sat with his head in his hands, plunged in meditation.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
X. DRAMA

“What is it, my child?” said Claude Vignon, who had slipped into the bedroom after Calyste and now took him by the hand. “You love; you think you are disdained; but it is not so. The field will be free to you in a few days and you will reign--beloved by more than one.”

“Loved!” cried Calyste, springing up, and beckoning Claude into the library, “Who loves me here?”

“Camille,” replied Claude.

“Camille loves me? And you!--what of you?”

“I?” answered Claude, “I--” He stopped; sat down on a sofa and rested his head with weary sadness on a cushion. “I am tired of life, but I have not the courage to quit it,” he went on after a short silence. “I wish I were mistaken in what I have just told you; but for the last few days more than one vivid light has come into my mind. I did not wander about the marshes for my pleasure; no, upon my soul I did not! The bitterness of my words when I returned and found you with Camille were the result of wounded feeling. I intend to have an explanation with her soon. Two minds as clear-sighted as hers and mine cannot deceive each other. Between two such professional duellists the combat cannot last long. Therefore I may as well tell you now that I shall leave Les Touches; yes, to-morrow perhaps, with Conti. After we are gone strange things will happen here. I shall regret not witnessing conflicts of passion of a kind so rare in France, and so dramatic. You are very young to enter such dangerous lists; you interest me; were it not for the profound disgust I feel for women, I would stay and help you play this game. It is difficult; you may lose it; you have to do with two extraordinary women, and you feel too much for one to use the other judiciously. Beatrix is dogged by nature; Camille has grandeur. Probably you will be wrecked between those reefs, drawn upon them by the waves of passion. Beware!”

Calyste’s stupefaction enabled Claude to speak thus without interruption. To hear from Claude that Camille loved him, at the very moment when he felt he loved Beatrix for life, was a weight too heavy for his untried soul. Goaded by regret for the past and crushed by his position between Beatrix, whom he loved, and Camille, whom he had ceased to love, the boy sat despairing and undecided. He sought in vain the reasons for Felicite’s rejection of his love and for bringing Claude from Paris to oppose it. Now and then Beatrix’s voice from the little salon reached him, and with it a savage desire to rush in and carry her off. What must he do? Could he come to Les Touches? If Camille loved him how could he come there to adore Beatrix? No solution presented itself.

Silence reigned. Midnight sounded on the clock of the adjoining bedroom, and the voices of Claude and Camille roused him. Before he could rise, he heard Claude speak to Felicite in a voice terrible with truth.

“You came to Paris last year desperately in love with Calyste,” Claude was saying, “but you were horrified at the thought of the consequences of such a passion at your age; it would lead to a gulf, perhaps to suicide. Love cannot exist unless it thinks itself eternal, and you saw a horrible parting. You thought of ‘Adolphe.’ Then you took me, as soldiers use fascines to build a screen between themselves and the enemy. You brought me to Les Touches to mask your real feelings and leave yourself free to follow your secret adoration. The scheme was grand and ignoble both; but to carry it out you should have chosen a common man or one so preoccupied that you could easily deceive him. You thought me simple and easy to mislead as a man of genius. I am not a man of genius, I am a man of talent, and as such I have divined you. When I praised women of your age yesterday, explaining why Calyste loved you, did you suppose I took your ravished, dazzling glance to be for me? The eyes were turned on me, but the heart on Calyste. You have never been loved, my poor Maupin, and you never will be after rejecting the beautiful fruit offered you at the portals of that hell of woman, whose lock is the numeral 50!”

“Why has love fled me?” she said in a low voice. “Tell me, you who know all.”

“Because you are not lovable,” he answered. “You do not bend to love; love must bend to you. You were never naive; your mind has too much depth; your strength repulses men of strength who fear a struggle. You are grand and sublime; bear with the consequence of those two qualities--they fatigue.”

“What a sentence!” cried Camille. “Am I not a woman? Do you think me an anomaly?”

“Possibly,” said Claude.

“We will see!” said the woman, stung.

“Farewell, my dear Camille; I leave to-morrow. I am not angry; I think you the greatest of women, but if I continued to serve you as a screen,” said Claude, with emphasis, “you would despise me. We can part now without pain; we have neither happiness to regret nor hopes betrayed. To you, as to some few men of genius, love is not what Nature made it; you see it as Christianity created it--an ideal kingdom of noble sentiments and moral devotions. I thought to share that; you misled me. I return to my misery,--to my prison of Paris. Such deception would have once made me flee existence; to-day it plants a disenchantment that will plunge me into solitude. I am without the faith which helps the Fathers to people theirs with sacred images. It is to this, my dear Camille, the superiority of our mind has brought us; we may both sing that terrible hymn: ‘Lord God, Thou hast made me powerful and solitary.’”

At this moment Calyste appeared.

“I ought not to leave you ignorant that I am here,” he said.

Mademoiselle des Touches showed the utmost fear; a sudden flush colored her impassible face. During this strange scene she was more beautiful than at any other moment of her life.

“We thought you gone, Calyste,” said Claude. “But this involuntary discretion will do no harm; perhaps you may be more at your ease at Les Touches by knowing Felicite as she is. Her silence shows me I am not mistaken as to the part she meant me to play. As I told you before, she loves you, but it is for yourself, not for herself,--a sentiment few women conceive; few know the voluptuous pleasure of sufferings born of longing,--that magnificent passion reserved for man. But she is in some sense a man,” he added sardonically. “Your love for Beatrix will make her suffer and make her happy too.”

Tears came into Camille’s eyes; she could not look at Claude or Calyste. She had supposed it impossible for any man, however keen, to perceive a delicacy so self-immolating. Her evident humiliation made Calyste share her emotion. He fell at her feet and kissed her hands, laying his tearful face upon them.

“Claude,” she said, “do not abandon me, or what will become of me?”

“What have you to fear?” replied the critic. “Calyste has fallen in love at first sight with the marquise; you cannot find a better barrier between you than that. This passion of his is worth more to you than I. Yesterday there might have been danger for you and for him; to-day you can take a maternal interest in him,” he said, with a mocking smile, “and be proud of his triumphs.”

Camille looked at Calyste, who had raised his head abruptly. Claude enjoyed, for vengeance, the sight of their confusion.

“You yourself have driven him to Madame de Rochefide,” continued Claude, “and he is now under the spell. You have dug your own grave. Had you confided in me, you would have escaped the sufferings that await you.”

“Sufferings!” cried Camille, taking Calyste’s head in her hands and kissing his hair, on which her tears fell. “No, Calyste; forget what you have heard; I count for nothing in all this.”

She rose with a dominant look that subdued both men.

“While Claude was speaking,” she said, “I conceived the beauty and the grandeur of love without hope; it is the sentiment that brings us nearest God. Do not love me, Calyste; but I will love you as no woman will!”

It was the cry of a wounded eagle. Claude himself knelt, took Camille’s hand, and kissed it.

“Leave us now, Calyste,” she said, “it is late, and your mother will be uneasy.”

Calyste returned to Guerande with lagging steps, glancing again and again to see the light from Beatrix’s room. He was surprised to find how little pity he felt for Camille, but presently felt the agony of her suffering again, and imagined he heard the moans of that noble woman.

At his paternal home total silence reigned. He saw his mother sewing by the lamp; tears moistened his eyes.

“What has happened?” cried Fanny, seeing his emotion.

For answer Calyste took his mother in his arms and kissed her cheeks, forehead, and hair with passionate effusion.

“It is you I love, you!” cried Calyste; “you who live for me; you whom I long to render happy!”

“But you are not yourself, my child,” said the baroness. “What has happened to you?”

“Camille loves me, but I love her no longer,” he answered.

The next day Calyste told Gasselin to watch the road to Saint-Nazaire and report if Mademoiselle des Touches’ carriage passed. Gasselin reported it had passed with four persons.

“Then saddle my horse and my father’s.”

Gasselin departed.

“My, nephew, what mischief is in you now?” said his Aunt Zephirine.

“Let the boy amuse himself, sister,” cried the baron. “Yesterday he was dull; to-day he is gay.”

“Did you tell him that our dear Charlotte was to arrive to-day?” said Zephirine.

“No,” replied the baroness.

“I thought perhaps he was going to meet her,” said Mademoiselle du Guenic, slyly.

“If Charlotte is to stay three months with her aunt, he will have plenty of opportunities to see her,” said his mother.

“Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel wants me to marry Charlotte, to save me from perdition,” said Calyste, laughing.

“It is written above,” said the old maid; “I shall not die tranquil or happy. I wanted to see our family continued. What can you, my fine nephew, put in the scale against such duties? Is it that actress at Les Touches?”

“What?” said the baron; “how can Mademoiselle des Touches hinder Calyste’s marriage, when it becomes necessary for us to make it? I shall go and see her.”

“I assure you, father,” said Calyste, “that Felicite will never be an obstacle to my marriage.”

Gasselin appeared with the horses.

“Where are you going, chevalier?” said his father.

“To Saint-Nazaire.”

“Ha, ha! and when is the marriage to be?” said the baron, believing Calyste hurried to see Charlotte. “Spare the horses,” he continued; “they have more than thirty miles to go.”

Calyste started with a tender farewell to his mother.

“Dear treasure!” she said as he rode through the gateway.

“God keep him!” replied the baron; “for we cannot replace him.”

The words made the baroness shudder.

“My nephew does not love Charlotte enough to ride to Saint-Nazaire after her,” said the old blind woman to Mariotte.

“No; but a fine lady, a marquise, has come to Les Touches,” said Mariotte.

“They’ll kill him,” said Mademoiselle du Guenic.

“That won’t kill him,” replied Mariotte, pleased with Calyste’s behavior.

Calyste rode fast until Gasselin asked if he was trying to catch the boat. He had no wish to see Conti or Claude, but expected to be invited to ride back with the ladies. He thought to himself of the road Camille had passed and its trees.

“Tiens! here comes the coach from Nazaire,” cried Gasselin.

Calyste found Camille and the marquise waving to passengers on the departing steamer. Beatrix was charming in a rice-straw hat and muslin gown, poised like a statue. Conti could see Calyste from the vessel.

“I thought,” said Calyste, “that you would probably come back alone.”

“You have done right, Calyste,” she replied, pressing his hand.

Beatrix turned, saw her young lover, and gave him an imperious look. A smile on Camille’s lips made the marquise aware of the vulgarity of such conduct. She said to Calyste, smiling,--

“Are you not guilty of a slight impertinence in supposing that I should bore Camille, if left alone with her?”

“My dear, one man to two widows is none too much,” said Mademoiselle des Touches, taking Calyste’s arm, and leaving Beatrix to watch the vessel.

At this moment voices approached: Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel, the Vicomtesse de Kergarouet, Charlotte, and Gasselin. Charlotte saw Calyste.

“Why, there’s Calyste!” she exclaimed.

“Go and offer them seats in my carriage,” said Camille to Calyste; “the maid can sit with the coachman. I saw those ladies lose their places.”

Calyste carried the message. Madame de Kergarouet was surprised the viscountess’s elder sister refused to profit by Camille’s offer. In Nantes Camille was read and admired, justified by fortune and success. The viscountess, eager to see her, dragged her old sister forward.

“Good-morning, Calyste,” said Charlotte.

“Oh! good-morning, Charlotte,” replied Calyste, not offering his arm. Both were confused. Charlotte had built a castle in Spain of romantic hopes now ruined. She and Calyste had played together in childhood; she had assumed a future with him. Now she faced jealousy.

Charlotte was of ordinary height, with a round face, black eyes, and abundant brown hair. Her travelling dress of common stuff seemed horrible beside the fresh toilettes of Beatrix and Camille. The Vicomtesse was tall, hard, withered, full of pretensions and local gossip, aiming to humiliate Parisians and fish for compliments. Her manners had passed to her daughters. Meeting Camille and Beatrix would be a future topic for a hundred conversations.

“Monsieur le chevalier,” she said to Camille and Beatrix, pointing to Calyste, “has conveyed your friendly proposal, but we fear to inconvenience you.”

“Sister, I shall not put these ladies to inconvenience,” said Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel; “I can find a horse in Saint-Nazaire.”

Camille and Beatrix exchanged a glance that annihilated Calyste’s memories and projects. “We can very well put five in the carriage,” replied Mademoiselle des Touches. The viscountess overwhelmed her with thanks.

“Good heavens, Calyste!” said Camille in his ear as he returned with Madame de Rochefide, “are you to have that for a mother-in-law, and the little one for a wife?”

“Because her aunt is rich,” replied Calyste, sarcastically.

The party moved toward the inn. The viscountess made Camille a speech on the savages of Saint-Nazaire.

“I love Brittany, madame,” replied Camille gravely. “I was born at Guerande.”

Calyste admired Mademoiselle des Touches; she put him at ease in spite of the previous night’s declarations. Her eyes were ringed with dark circles showing she had not slept, but her brow dominated the inward storm with cold placidity.

“What queens!” he said to Charlotte, offering her his arm.

“What an idea your mother has had,” said the old maid, taking Charlotte’s other arm, “to put herself in the company of that reprobate woman!”

“Oh, you!” replied Calyste, “she has bewitched you.”

“Mademoiselle Charlotte is right,” he said. “I regard her with the same friendship I feel for you.”

“Since when have the du Guenics taken to telling lies?” asked the old maid.

“Since the Pen-Hoels have grown deaf,” replied Calyste.

“Are you not in love with her?” demanded the old maid.

“I have been, but I am so no longer,” he said.

“Bad boy! then why have you given us such anxiety? I know very well that love is only foolishness; there is nothing solid but marriage,” she remarked, glancing at Charlotte.

Charlotte hoped to recover by recalling childhood memories. They leaned affectionately; Calyste resolved to have a clear explanation with the little heiress.

The horses were put in; Camille placed Madame de Kergarouet and Charlotte on the back seat. Calyste rode beside the carriage all the way; the horses went slowly enough to allow him to keep his eyes on Beatrix.

History must lose the curious conversations that went on between the four in the carriage, for it is impossible to report the hundred and more versions that went the round of Nantes. The viscountess tried to probe Camille’s authorship.

“How do you write your books?” she began.

“Much as you do your worsted-work or knitting,” replied Camille.

“But where do you find those deep reflections, those seductive pictures?”

“Where you find the witty things you say, madame; there is nothing so easy as to write books, provided you will--”

Charlotte felt her mother’s absurdity and tried to stop it; but the viscountess went on.

Calyste, trotting slowly beside the carriage, could only see the faces of the two ladies on the front seat. Beatrix constantly avoided meeting his eyes, and held her shawl and hands crossed, apparently plunged in meditation.

In a shaded part of the road, Camille called Madame de Rochefide’s attention to the harmonies of the place and praised Calyste’s riding.

“He rides like an Englishman,” said the marquise indifferently.

“His mother is Irish,--an O’Brien,” said Charlotte, thinking herself insulted.

They drove through Guerande; a crowd gathered, astonished. Calyste rode on to announce the company’s arrival; then returned to give his arm to the two ladies and bid Camille and Beatrix adieu.

He kissed Felicite’s hand, hoping to kiss the marquise’s, but she kept her arms crossed. Camille whispered a friendly touch to his ear.

“Quite true,” thought Calyste. “I am forgetting her advice--but I shall always forget it, I’m afraid.”

Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel, the Vicomtesse, and Charlotte found dinner ready and were treated with cordiality by the du Guenics. The rector and the chevalier arrived in time for liqueurs. After dinner there was an enthusiastic cry for mouche. All supposed Calyste free and almost married to Charlotte. He alone kept silence, comparing his life-long friends with the two Parisians, witty, accomplished, and tasteful. He could find no excuse to leave to go to Les Touches, when Madame de Kergarouet mentioned she regretted not accepting Camille’s carriage offer for the return to Saint-Nazaire.

Fanny saw her son’s uneasiness and intervened.

“Madame,” she said to the viscountess, “you would do better to accept Mademoiselle des Touches’ offer. Calyste, go up to Les Touches and arrange it; but don’t be long.”

“It won’t take me ten minutes,” cried Calyste, kissing his mother.

XI. FEMALE DIPLOMACY

Calyste ran to Les Touches and reached the portico just as Camille and Beatrix were leaving the grand salon after dinner. He offered his arm to Felicite.

“So you have abandoned your viscountess and her daughter for us,” she said, pressing his arm; “we are able now to understand the full merit of that sacrifice.”

“Are these Kergarouets related to the Portendueres?” asked Madame de Rochefide.

“The viscountess is the admiral’s great-niece,” replied Camille.

“Well, she’s a charming girl,” said Beatrix, placing herself in a Gothic chair. “She will just do for you, Monsieur du Guenic.”

“The marriage will never take place,” said Camille hastily.

Mortified by the marquise’s calm air toward the Breton girl, Calyste remained speechless.

“Why so, Camille?” asked Beatrix.

“Really, my dear,” said Camille, seeing Calyste’s despair, “you are not generous; did I advise Conti to marry?”

Beatrix looked with mingled surprise and suspicion. Calyste, sensing Camille’s support and emotion, took her hand; she left him and sat at the piano, improvising melancholy variations.

Beatrix watched Calyste more than listened. After an hour Beatrix retired to her apartments. Camille took Calyste into her chamber and closed the door, fearing to be overheard.

“My child,” she said, “if you want to succeed with Beatrix, you must seem to love me still, or you will fail. You are a child; you know nothing of women; all you know is how to love. Now loving and making one’s self beloved are two different things. If you go your own way you will fall into horrible suffering, and I wish to see you happy. If you rouse her pride or self-will, she is capable of going to Paris and rejoining Conti; and what will you do then?”

“I shall love her.”

“You won’t see her again.”

“Oh! yes, I shall,” he said.

“How?”

“I shall follow her.”

“Why, you are as poor as Job, my dear.”

“My father, Gasselin, and I lived for three months in Vendee on one hundred and fifty francs, marching night and day.”

“Calyste,” said Mademoiselle des Touches, “listen. I know you have too much candor to play a part, too much honesty to deceive; and I don’t want to corrupt you. Yet deception is the only way by which you can win Beatrix; I take it upon myself. In a week she shall love you.”

“Is it possible?” he cried clasping his hands.

“Yes,” replied Camille, “but you must obey me blindly. Come every day and devote yourself to me. Avoid Beatrix if you meet her. We will stay together till four o’clock; you shall study while I smoke. I will buy you books. The evenings we will spend together, and I permit you to make love to me if you can--it will be for the best.”

“I know, Camille, that your affection for me is great,” he replied; “but I don’t see what you hope from all this.”

“I hope to make her love you.”

“Good heavens! it cannot be possible!” he cried.

“Now listen carefully,” she said. “If you break our agreement, if you speak privately with the marquise, if you let her question you, if you fail in the silent part I ask, you will lose her forever.”

“I don’t understand,” cried Calyste.

“If you did, you wouldn’t be the noble and beautiful Calyste that you are,” she replied, taking his hand and kissing it.

Calyste then, for the first time, took Camille round the waist and kissed her gently with tenderness, not love. Mademoiselle des Touches did not restrain her tears.

“Go now,” she said, “my child; and tell your viscountess that my carriage is at her command.”

Calyste went home gaily, believing that in a week Beatrix would love him. The players at mouche found him once more the Calyste they had missed. Charlotte attributed his change to herself. The tournament of cards lasted till eleven. Mariotte had made galettes of buckwheat, and the du Guenics served a little supper before the departure of the guests. The modest hospitality had a charming effect.

A few moments after Calyste left Les Touches, Beatrix, who had heard him go, returned to Camille and found her with humid eyes.

“What is it, Felicite?” asked the marquise.

“I am forty years old, and I love him!” said Mademoiselle des Touches, with agony. “If you knew, Beatrix, the tears I have shed over lost youth! To be loved out of pity! to owe one’s happiness to perpetual care, to traps for innocence--oh, it is infamous! If it were not for the absolution in love’s magnitude, I would--if he asked it,--I would fling myself into the sea. Sometimes I wish he would ask it; it would be an oblation. Ah, Beatrix, by coming here you have set me a hard task. I know it will be difficult to keep him against you; but you love Conti, you are noble and generous, you will not deceive me; on the contrary, you will help me to retain Calyste’s love. I expected the impression you would make, but I have not seemed jealous; that would only have added fuel. I described you so glowing that you hardly realize the portrait, though you are more beautiful than ever.”

This mix of truth and deception duped the marquise. Claude Vignon had told Conti the reasons for his departure, and Beatrix was informed of them. She resolved to behave generously and give Calyste the cold shoulder; yet she felt the quiver of joy in being beloved. The homage a woman inspires in any man’s heart is flattery, and when the man belongs to a friend it gives delight. Beatrix sat beside her friend and began to coax her prettily.

“You have not a white hair,” she said; “you haven’t even a wrinkle.” She showed Camille the slight withering her own journey had cost her: a faint line at the wrists and temples.

“Your letter told me all,” replied Camille; “happiness ignores all but itself. You boasted too much of yours to be really happy. Truth is deaf, dumb, and blind where love is. Seeing that you have reasons to leave Conti, I feared to have you here. Calyste is an angel; his innocent heart will not resist your eyes. I am what I have never been--a child! I am sure of him, but I like to play at jealousy; he likes it too. Besides that is part of my secret.”

Beatrix, between jealousy and generosity, floated; she consented to bed piqued by curiosity and full of Calyste. Camille, when alone, burst into tears, smoked opium-soaked tobacco and saw the young head she had lost.

“What a glorious book to write, if I were only to express my pain!” she said. “Sappho lived before me. And Sappho was young. My poor Camille, smoke your hookah; you haven’t even the resource of making a poem of your misery!”

The next morning Calyste came before mid-day to Camille’s room and found books. Felicite sat by the window, smoking, contemplating the marshes, the sea, and Calyste, and now and then said a few words about Beatrix. She raised a curtain to attract the marquise’s attention and throw a band of light across Calyste’s book.

“Today stay to dinner; but you must refuse with a glance at the marquise that will show her how much you regret not staying,” she said.

When the three met in the salon and played this comedy, Calyste for a moment felt his equivocal position; the glance he cast at Beatrix was far more expressive than Felicite expected. Beatrix had dressed herself charmingly.

“What a bewitching toilet, my dearest!” said Camille when Calyste departed.

These manoeuvres lasted six days, during which Camille put all her ability into conversations with the marquise. They were like the preliminaries of a duel between two women, fought with snares, feints, false generosity, deceitful confessions, and crafty confidences by which one hid and the other bared her love. Camille’s treacherous words entered Beatrix’s heart and left poison. Beatrix took offence at what she thought Camille’s distrust; she was enchanted to find the great writer a victim to the pettiness of her sex and resolved to show where her greatness ended.

“My dear, what is to be the excuse today for Monsieur du Guenic’s not dining with us?” she asked mockingly. “Monday you had engagements; Tuesday the dinner was poor; Wednesday you feared his mother’s anger; Thursday a walk; yesterday you dismissed him. Today I shall have my way and mean that he shall stay.”

“Already, my dear!” said Camille with irony. The marquise blushed. “Stay, Monsieur du Guenic,” said Camille in the tone of a queen.

Beatrix became cold and hard, contradictory, and almost rude to Calyste, whom Felicite sent home to play mouche with Charlotte de Kergarouet.

“She is not dangerous at any rate,” said Beatrix, sarcastically.

Young lovers are like hungry men; kitchen odors do not appease their hunger. As Calyste walked back to Guerande, his soul was full of Beatrix; he paid no heed to Camille’s feminine cleverness. During the week the marquise had only written once to Conti, a symptom Camille imparted to Calyste. All his life was concentrated in their short meetings. The promise “Beatrix shall love you” was his talisman. He read through the night and brought back cartloads of books.

His aunt cursed Mademoiselle des Touches; his mother, seeing his late night study, suspected the secret. Though love was a sealed book to her, Fanny rose through maternal tenderness into some ideas of it; she was shocked at her son’s state. Calyste had one thought; Beatrix was always before him. His abstraction in the evenings resembled his father’s somnolence. Fanny implored him to give up Les Touches and leave the two women.

“Not go to Les Touches!” he cried.

“Oh! yes, yes, go! do not look so, my darling!” she cried, kissing him.

Under these circumstances Calyste nearly lost the fruit of Camille’s plot through the fury of his love. Finally he swore, in spite of his promise, to see Beatrix and speak to her. He wanted to read her eyes, study her dress, smell her perfume, hear her voice, and embrace, by a single glance, the whole figure.

One morning he resolved to go earlier than agreed and meet Beatrix in the garden. Mademoiselle des Touches and the marquise had just returned from the marshes and strolled up a garden path.

“If the scenery pleases you,” said Camille, “we must take Calyste to Croisic. There are splendid rocks, little bays, charmingly unexpected, besides the sea itself. Also you will see women making fuel with cow-dung.”

“What! will you really risk Calyste?” cried the marquise laughing.

“Ah, my dear,” replied Camille, “if you knew the angelic soul of that dear child, you would understand. In him, mere beauty is nothing; one must enter that pure heart, amazed at every step into the kingdom of love. What faith! what grace! what innocence! The ancients worshipped sacred beauty. Beauty is the genius of things; it is Nature’s ensign; Calyste is a vision realized. He has the regal power of a lion, tranquilly unsuspicious of its royalty. When at ease he is witty; I love his girlish timidity. My soul rests in his heart away from corruptions, knowledge, literature,--those accessories under which we stifle happiness. I am sure of him, but I like to play at jealousy; he likes it too. Besides, that is part of my secret.”

Beatrix walked pensively. Camille endured martydom, casting sidelong flame-like looks.

“Ah, my dear; but you are happy,” said Beatrix, laying her hand on Camille’s arm.

“Yes, happy indeed!” replied Felicite with savage bitterness.

They dropped upon a bench from exhaustion. No creature of her sex was ever played upon like an instrument with more Machiavellian penetration than Beatrix that week.

“Yes, you are happy, but I!” said Camille. “To know of Conti’s infidelities, and have to bear them!”

“Why not leave him?” said Camille, seeing the hour to strike decisive blow.

“Can I?” said Beatrix.

“Oh! poor boy!” they both gazed into a clump of trees stupefied.

Camille rose.

“I will go and hasten breakfast,” she said.

“Our conversation has taken away mine,” remarked Beatrix.

The marquise in her morning dress was outlined in white against the dark foliage. Calyste, who had slipped into the garden, took a path and met her. Beatrix could not restrain a quiver.

“Madame, in what way did I displease you yesterday?” he said after commonplace sentences.

“But you have neither pleased me nor displeased me,” she said gently.

The tone encouraged Calyste.

“Am I so indifferent to you?” he said as tears came to his eyes.

“Ought we not to be indifferent to each other? Have we not, each of us, another, and a binding attachment?”

“Oh!” cried Calyste, “if you mean Camille, I did love her, but I love her no longer.”

“Then why are you shut up together every morning?” she said with a treacherous smile. “I don’t suppose Camille prefers her cigar to you, or that you spend four hours a day reading her romances.”

“So then you know--” began Calyste, his face glowing.

“Calyste!” cried Camille angrily, appearing and interrupting him. She took his arm and drew him away. “Calyste, is this what you promised me?”

Beatrix heard the reproach and was stupefied by the young man’s assertion; she could not comprehend it. The part played by Camille, as shocking as it was grand, is one of those wicked grandeurs women practise when driven to extremity: an abnegation that breaks hearts and either plunges them to hell or lifts them to heaven.

During breakfast, invited to share, the marquise resolved to stifle the germs of love rising in her. She was neither cold nor hard to Calyste, but gently indifferent; this tortured him. Felicite proposed an excursion in two days to the country between Les Touches, Croisic, and Batz and asked Calyste to hire a boat and sailors. Beatrix stopped the plan, saying she did not wish to make excursions.

Calyste’s face, which had beamed, clouded.

“What are you afraid of, my dear?” asked Camille.

“My position is so delicate I do not wish to compromise my happiness,” said Beatrix, with a glance at Calyste. “You know how suspicious Conti can be; if he knew--”

“Who will tell him?”

“He is coming back here to fetch me,” said Beatrix.

Calyste turned pale. In spite of Camille’s urgings and his entreaties, Beatrix remained inflexible, showing the obstinacy Camille had warned about. Calyste left Les Touches the victim of one of those depressions of love that threaten to become madness. He began to revolve plans for an explanation with Beatrix.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
When Calyste reached home he did not leave his room until dinner; after dinner he returned to it. At ten o’clock his mother, uneasy at his absence, found him writing amid a pile of blotted and half-torn paper. He was composing a letter to Beatrix; distrust of Camille had entered his mind after the marquise’s manner in the garden had encouraged him.

No first love-letter is a brilliant literary effort; it pours from the heart and repeats itself in many revisions. This is the one Calyste finally wrote and read aloud to his astonished mother, who felt the old mansion burn with the blaze of her son’s love.

Calyste to Madame la Marquise de Rochefide.

Madame,—I loved you when you were but a dream; judge then of the force my love gained when I saw you. The dream was surpassed by the reality. I have nothing to say of your beauty and charm that you do not know, yet perhaps no other heart has felt such deep sentiment as mine.

I have studied you day and night, penetrated the mysteries of your being, the delicacy so little appreciated. Have you ever been loved, understood, adored as you deserve? Not a trait of yours escapes my heart; your pride is understood by mine; the grandeur of your glance, your grace, your distinction—everything harmonizes with the thoughts and desires I divined in you; hence I think myself worthy of your notice. If I had not, in the last few days, become another yourself, I could not speak of myself; this letter relates more to you than to me.

Beatrix, to write to you I have silenced my youth, laid aside myself, aged my thoughts—by this week of dreadful sufferings you have innocently caused. Do not think me one of those common lovers you laugh at. What merit is there in loving a beautiful, noble woman? I am a child attracted as insects to light. You cannot do otherwise than tread upon the flowers of my soul; all my happiness is in your stepping on them.

Absolute devotion, unbounded faith, love unquenchable—these treasures are nothing if they cannot win the love we crave. Sometimes I do not understand why such worship does not warm its idol; when I meet your cold, stern eye I turn to ice within. Your disdain, that governs between us, not my worship. You cannot hate me as much as I love you; why should the weaker feeling rule? I loved Felicite with all my heart, yet forgot her in a moment when I saw you. She was my error; you are my truth.

You have unknowingly destroyed my happiness, though you owe me nothing. I loved Camille without hope, and I have no hope from you; only my divinity has changed—I was a pagan, I am now a Christian. You have taught me that to love is the greatest joy; being loved comes later. Camille said love that does not grow is a wretched passion; she foresaw the end of ours. That noble Camille mingled her tears with mine yet rejected a love she saw must end. Therefore I am free to love you here on earth and in heaven. If you loved me you would have no such arguments as Camille used; we are young and could fly on equal wing across a sunny heaven.

But what am I saying? My thoughts exceed my hopes. Believe in the submission, patience, mute adoration; I only ask you not to wound uselessly. I know you cannot love me without losing self-esteem; therefore I ask no return. Camille once spoke of a fatality in names; I felt it on the jetty of Guerande when I read your name. You will pass through my life as Beatrice passed through Dante’s; my heart will be a pedestal for that white statue—cold, distant, jealous, oppressive.

It is forbidden to you to love me; you will suffer betrayals and humiliations, bound by a devil’s pride to the column you embraced; you are like Samson, perishing by clinging to it. But I have not divined this—my love is too blind; Camille told me. Blood gushes from my heart and darkens my intellect; I can only adore you whatever you may do.

Camille calls your resolution obstinacy; I call it virtue. You are more beautiful for it. I know my destiny; the pride of a Breton can rise to the height of a woman who makes pride a virtue.

Dear Beatrix, be kind and consoling. When victims were crowned with flowers, crown me with pity; you owe me the music of my sacrifice. Am I not proof of your grandeur? Will you not rise to my disdained love? Ask Camille how I behaved when she told me she loved Claude Vignon; I suffered in silence. For you I will show greater strength—I will bury my feelings if you do not drive me to despair. A single word of praise from you will make me bear martyrdom.

But if you persist in cold silence you will make me think you fear me. Be with me what you are—charming, witty, gay, tender. Talk to me of Conti as Camille has talked to me of Claude. I have no other genius than that of love; nothing in me should make you fear. I will be in your presence as if I loved you not.

Can you refuse so humble a prayer? The child only asks that his Light shall lighten him, his Sun warm him.

The man you love can be with you at all times, but I have so few days in which to see you; you will soon be freed from me. May I return to Les Touches tomorrow? Will you not refuse my arm for that excursion? We shall go to Croisic and Batz; if you do not go I shall take it for an answer—Calyste will understand.

There were four more pages of similar, close, impassioned writing where Calyste expounded his youth and life, mostly exclamatory and repetitive. Though unlikely to move Madame de Rochefide, it made his mother weep.

“My child, you are not happy,” she said in her tender voice. The tumultuous poem rising like a storm terrified the baroness; for the first time she read a love-letter. Calyste, perplexed about how to send it, followed his mother into the salon with the letter burning in his pocket. The Chevalier du Halga was there; Charlotte de Kergarouet tried to use Calyste’s indifference to further her own aims. Calyste wandered like a distracted butterfly. When the card game ended he drew the chevalier aside.

“What is the best way to send a letter secretly to one’s mistress?” he asked in a whisper.

Slip it into the maid’s hand with a louis or two, the chevalier suggested—though on the whole it was best to give the letter oneself. Calyste snatched his hat and ran to Les Touches, where he appeared like an apparition in the little salon, where Camille and Beatrix sat together on the sofa. Calyste flung himself impulsively beside the marquise, took her hand, and slipped the letter into it so rapidly that Felicite did not perceive it. His heart tingled as Beatrix pressed his hand and, without interrupting her words, slipped the letter into her glove.

“You fling yourself on a woman’s dress without mercy,” she laughed.

“Calyste is wanting in common sense,” said Felicite, openly rebuking him.

Calyste kissed Camille’s hand, then ran his fingernail over the piano keys in a rapid scale. His exuberance surprised Camille, who signed for him to come near.

“What is the matter with you?” she whispered.

“Nothing,” he said.

“There is something between them,” thought Mademoiselle des Touches. The marquise was impenetrable. Camille tried to draw speech from Calyste, hoping his artless mind would betray itself; he excused himself because his mother expected him, and left Les Touches at eleven, after facing a piercing glance from Camille.

That wakeful night Calyste searched the main street of Guerande many times for an answer. At last the marquise’s waiting-woman brought him a note, which he read in the garden grotto.

Madame de Rochefide to Calyste.

You are a noble child, but only a child. You are bound to Camille, who adores you. You would not find in me the perfections that distinguish her or the happiness she can give. Whatever you may think, she is young and I am old; her heart is full of treasures, mine empty; she is unselfish and lives for you, while I am full of doubts and a slave.

You forget I love and am beloved. My situation forbids accepting homage; a man saying he loves me is an insult. To yield would lower me to the level of the lowest of my sex. You who are young and pure are carried away by fancy; you cannot make the reflections evil suggests. I will go further: were I humiliated, betrayed, abandoned—no one in the world would see me more. I believe I should find courage to kill a man who, seeing me thus, spoke to me of love.

You now know my mind. After receiving your letter and making you this reply I could be at my ease in Camille’s house and be what you ask; but the bitter ridicule that would ensue were I to soften my manner is dreadful. A second robbery from Camille would prove her want of power which no woman could forgive. Even if I loved you, Camille’s love for you is a barrier too high to be overleaped; none but a devil would fail to recoil before such treachery. There are motives delicate women keep to themselves which you men cannot understand.

Your mother is pure and spotless; she fulfils her destiny nobly. She is the woman your wife should be. I will never send you back, in jest, to little Charlotte; I commend you to some divine young girl worthy of your love.

If I were yours your life would be blighted. I should have taken your existence and made you unhappy; I am jealous—lions lurk in the path, monsters in drops of water. Trifles would make me wretched; inexorable thoughts from my heart would poison our existence. If after ten years a man were not as respectful and delicate, I should resent the change; such a lover could not believe in the Amadis and Cyrus of my dreams. True love to-day is but a dream; in yours I see merely the joy of desire whose end you do not yet perceive.

I am not forty; I have not bent my pride beneath experience; I may be too young to be anything but odious. I will not answer for my temper; my grace and charm are external. Perhaps I have not suffered enough to have the indulgent manners and tenderness born of cruel disappointments. Camille will always be your devoted slave; I should be an unreasonable tyrant.

Felicite’s tenderness is inexhaustible; she will marry you to some young girl, no matter what she suffers; she will smooth difficulties for you. The sale of an acre in Paris would free your estate in Brittany; she will make you her heir—you are already her son by adoption.

Alas! what could I do for your happiness? Nothing. Do not betray that infinite love which contents itself with the duties of motherhood. Camille is fortunate; she can forgive your fancy. I have studied her closely: she has mind and goodness, is generous and simple—rare amalgamations. Dante’s line about eternal happiness, “Senza brama sicura ricchezza,” seems made for her. She has told me of her career and how love has eluded her; she seems an example of the difficulty, perhaps impossibility, of uniting two great glories.

You, Calyste, are an angelic soul whose mate seems impossible to find; but Camille will obtain for you the hand of a young girl with whom you can make a happy home, even if she dies in doing so.

For myself, I hold out a friendly hand; I count on your mind to make you a brother, as I shall be a sister; let this letter end a correspondence between Les Touches and Guerande that is rather absurd.

Beatrix de Casteran.

The baroness, stirred by her son’s strange exhibitions and rapid changes, could not sit quietly. After looking at him from time to time, she rose and came to him humbly yet boldly to demand a favor she felt entitled to ask. Calyste read Beatrix’s letter aloud. These two noble, guileless souls saw no malice in the marquise’s cautious epistle.

“She is a noble, grand woman!” said the baroness with moist eyes. “I will pray for her. I did not know a woman could abandon her husband and child and yet keep a soul so virtuous. She is worthy of pardon.”

“Have I not every reason to adore her?” cried Calyste.

“But where will this love lead you?” said the baroness. “How dangerous are women with noble sentiments! There is less to fear from the bad. Marry Charlotte de Kergarouet and release two-thirds of the estate. By selling a few farms, Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel can secure that result in the marriage contract and help you manage your property. You could leave your children a great name and estate.”

“Forget Beatrix!” said Calyste, muffled, eyes on the ground.

He left and went to his room to write an answer.

Madame du Guenic, whose heart had kept every word of Beatrix’s letter, sought help to understand it and Calyste’s hope. The Chevalier du Halga, who frequented the mall with his dog, was found and the baroness, certain to meet him, went out. The sight of her walking in Guerande was an event; townspeople talked of it. Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel told her niece Charlotte, “Something very extraordinary is happening at the du Guenics.”

“Calyste is madly in love with that beautiful Marquise de Rochefide,” Charlotte said. “I ought to leave Guerande.”

The chevalier, surprised to be sought, unhooked his dog. “Chevalier,” began the baroness, “you used to practise gallantry?” He straightened with vain air as she, without naming Calyste or the marquise, recited the love-letter and asked his opinion of Beatrix’s reply. Du Halga listened, made grimaces, and finally—“When thoroughbred horses want to leap a barrier, they go up to reconnoitre it. Calyste is a lucky dog!” The baroness cried “Oh, hush!” He rambled into old exploits, but escorted her to the alley, faithful to gallant forms, neglecting Thisbe.

The baroness ran to Calyste’s room. He was absent; she saw an unsealed letter addressed to Madame de Rochefide on the table and, compelled by invincible curiosity, read it. The indiscretion punished her: the letter revealed how deep the gulf into which Calyste’s passion was hurling him plunged.

Calyste to Madame la Marquise de Rochefide.

What care I for the race of the du Guenics in these days, Beatrix? Their name is nothing to me. My name is Beatrix; your happiness is my happiness; your life is my life; all my fortune is in your heart. Our estates have been mortgaged for two hundred years; so they may remain; our farmers have them; no one can take them from us. To see you, to love you—that is my property, my object, my religion!

You talk to me of marrying! The thought convulses me. Is there another Beatrix? I will marry no one but you; I will wait twenty years if need be. I am young, and you will be ever beautiful. My mother is a saint; she has never loved; you have taught me what she lost, and what sacrifices she made. You have taught me to love my mother better; she is in my heart with you—no other can be there; she is your only rival—you reign supreme.

As for Camille, you need only say the word and I will ask her to tell you she is not loved by me. She is the mother of my intellect, nothing more. From the moment I saw you she became a sister, a friend, a comrade; we have rights only of friendship. I took her for a woman until I saw you. You have proved that Camille is a man—she swims, hunts, smokes, drinks, rides, writes and analyzes hearts—she has no woman’s weaknesses; her movements lack your grace. In you are all the things of womanhood I love. From that first moment I felt you were mine.

You will laugh, but the fancy has grown. It seems unnatural we should be apart. You are my soul; I cannot live where you are not!

Let me love you! Let us fly to a country where you know no one, where only God and I can reach your heart! My mother might follow. Ireland is full of castles; my mother’s family will lend us one. Beatrix, let us go! A boat, a few sailors, and we are there before any one knows we have fled.

You have never been loved. I see in your letter that if such reasons did not exist you might let yourself be loved by me. A sacred love wipes out the past. I love you so truly I could wish you doubly shamed if so my love might prove itself by making you a saint!

You call my love an insult. Oh, Beatrix, you do not mean it! The love of noble youth—one you called noble—would honor a queen. Tomorrow let us walk as lovers by the sea; your step on my sands will bless them anew. Give me this day of happiness; that passing alms from you will be eternal riches to your

Calyste.

The baroness let the letter fall before reading all. She knelt on a chair and prayed to God to save her son’s reason, to put his madness and error far from him. Calyste entered.

“What are you doing, mother?” he asked.

“I am praying to God for you,” she answered simply, turning tearful eyes on him. “I have committed the sin of reading that letter. My Calyste is mad!”

“A sweet madness!” he said, kissing her.

“I wish I could see that woman,” she sighed.

“Mamma,” Calyste answered, “we shall take a boat to-morrow and cross to Croisic. If you are on the jetty you can see her.”

So saying, he sealed his letter and departed for Les Touches. What especially terrified the baroness was that Calyste’s second letter showed the instinctive feeling and clear-sightedness of practiced experience; it read like something the Chevalier du Halga, with worldly knowledge, might have dictated.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Perhaps one of the greatest enjoyments for small or inferior minds is deceiving a great soul and setting snares for it. Beatrix knew herself far beneath Camille Maupin—this inferiority was not only in talent but in matters of the heart: passion.

When Calyste hurried to Les Touches with the impetuosity of first love, the marquise took keen delight in being the object of that affection. She did not wish to share the sentiment; she fancied herself heroic in repressing her caprice. She imagined she matched Camille’s devotion and persuaded herself she sacrificed for her friend. Her vanities, that notable coquetry, were flattered by Calyste’s love. Assailed by such seduction, she resisted it, praising her virtues inwardly.

The two women half-sat, half-reclined on the little salon divan, the room a scene of harmony and fragrance. The windows stood open; the north wind had ceased, a southerly breeze ruffled the salt lake, and the sun glittered on the shore sands. Their souls were as agitated as the scene was tranquil; the inward heat was ardent.

Bruised by the machinery she had set in motion, Camille guarded herself against the clever friendly enemy she had admitted. To preserve secrets and remain aloof, she contemplated nature; she cheated her aching heart by seeking meaning in the world, finding God in that desert of heaven and earth. When an unbeliever perceives God, he flings himself unreservedly into Catholicism, seen as a complete system.

That morning Camille wore the halo of thoughts born of these researches after a night of painful struggle. Calyste stood before her like a celestial image. The beautiful youth, to whom she had secretly devoted herself, had become a guardian angel. Did he not lift her into loftier regions where suffering ceased beneath the weight of infinity? Now a certain air of triumph about Beatrix disturbed her. No woman gains advantage without making it felt; the dumb moral struggle between these two, each hiding a secret and believing herself generous through hidden sacrifices, was strange.

Calyste arrived, the letter between his hand and glove ready to slip to Beatrix. Camille, noting a subtle change in her friend’s manner, watched Beatrix in a mirror at the moment Calyste entered. That sudden moment is crucial for women: the cleverest as well as the silliest, the frankest as the shrewdest, seldom keep secrets; they betray them in a look. Too much reserve or too little; a free luminous gaze; the mysterious lowering of eyelids—all betray what is hardest to hide; real indifference is too cold to simulate. Women have a genius for nuance; they can read a rival from head to foot. Two women observing each other play one of the world's choicest comedies.

“Calyste has committed some folly,” thought Camille, perceiving in each guest an indefinable air of mutual understanding.

Beatrix no longer feigned indifference; she regarded Calyste as her own. Calyste was even more transparent; he colored like guilty or happy people. He announced he had come to arrange the excursion for the following day.

“Then you really intend to go, my dear?” Camille asked.

“Yes,” said Beatrix.

“How did you know it, Calyste?” asked Mademoiselle des Touches.

“I came here to find out,” replied Calyste, prompted by a look from Madame de Rochefide, who did not want Camille to learn of their correspondence.

“They have an agreement together,” thought Camille, catching that look in its sweep.

Under that thought a horrible discomposure spread over her face and frightened Beatrix.

“What is the matter, my dear?” she cried.

“Nothing. Well, then, Calyste, send my horses and yours across to Croisic, so we may drive home by way of Batz. We will breakfast at Croisic and be home in time for dinner. You must arrange the boat. Let us start by half-past eight. You will see some fine sights, Beatrix, and one very strange one; you will see Cambremer, a man who does penance on a rock for having wilfully killed his son. Oh! you are in a primitive land, among a primitive race of people, moved by other sentiments than ordinary mortals. Calyste shall tell you the tale; it is a drama of the seashore.”

She went into her bedroom, stifling. Calyste gave his letter to Beatrix and followed Camille.

“Calyste, you are loved, I think; but you are hiding something from me; you have done some foolish thing.”

“Loved!” he exclaimed, sinking into a chair.

Camille glanced into the next room; Beatrix had disappeared—odd, since women seldom leave a room with the man they admire unless sure of seeing him again or for some advantage. Mademoiselle des Touches wondered, “Can he have given her a letter?” but thought the innocent Breton incapable of such boldness.

“If you have disobeyed me, all will be lost through your own fault,” she said gravely. “Go now and make your preparations for tomorrow.”

She made a gesture Calyste did not resist.

As he walked toward Croisic to hire boatmen, fears entered Calyste’s mind. Camille’s speech foreshadowed something fatal; he believed this maternal second sight. When he returned four hours later, tired and expecting to dine at Les Touches, he found Camille’s maid at the door to tell him that neither her mistress nor the marquise could receive him that evening. Calyste, surprised, wished to question her, but she bade him hastily good-night and closed the door.

Six o’clock was striking in Guerande as Calyste entered his house; Mariotte gave him his belated dinner, after which he played mouche in gloomy meditation. Alternations of joy and gloom, the extinction of hopes following seeming certainties of being loved, bruised the young soul that had flown so high that the fall was dreadful.

“Does anything trouble you, my Calyste?” his mother asked.

“Nothing,” he replied, his eyes lacking their usual light.

It is not hope but despair that measures our ambitions. The finest poems of hope are sung in secret; grief appears unveiled.

“Calyste, you are not nice,” said Charlotte, after vain attempts at the provincial witcheries that turn to teasing.

“I am tired,” he said, rising and bidding the company good-night.

“Calyste is much changed,” remarked Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel.

“We haven’t beautiful dresses trimmed with lace; we don’t shake our sleeves like this, or twist our bodies like that; we don’t know how to give sidelong glances and turn our eyes,” said Charlotte, mimicking the marquise’s air and attitudes. “We haven’t that head voice, nor the interesting little cough heu! heu! like a spook’s sigh; we are healthy and robust, and love our friends without coquetry; and when we look at them, we don’t pretend to stick a dart into them or watch them slyly; we can’t bend our heads like a weeping willow just to look more interesting—this way.”

Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel laughed, but neither the chevalier nor the baron paid heed to this provincial satire against Paris.

“But the Marquise de Rochefide is a very handsome woman,” the old maid said.

“My dear,” said the baroness to her husband, “I know she is going to Croisic tomorrow. Let us walk on the jetty; I should like to see her.”

While Calyste tried to guess what had closed Les Touches’ doors to him, a scene between Camille and Beatrix unfolded that would influence the morrow.

Calyste’s last letter stirred in Madame de Rochefide’s heart emotions hitherto unknown to it. Women seldom are the object of love so young, guileless, sincere, and unconditional as his. Beatrix, who had loved more than she had been loved, suddenly desired to be a tyrant. Yet reading and rereading the letter, a cruel idea pierced her.

What were Calyste and Camille doing together since Claude Vignon’s departure? If Calyste did not love Camille, and Camille knew it, how did they spend their mornings alone? Memory flashed certain speeches of Camille into Beatrix’s mind; a grinning devil seemed to show her, like a magic mirror, that heroic woman’s portrait with gestures and aspects that enlightened her. What! Instead of being Camille’s equal, was she crushed by Félicité? Instead of outwitting her, had she been outwitted? Was she merely a toy, a pleasure Camille gave to her child, whom she loved with an extraordinary, nonvulgar passion?

To Beatrix such a thought was a thunderclap. She reviewed the past week minutely; the roles each had played unrolled before her; she felt horribly belittled. In her fury of jealous anger she fancied Camille’s conduct an intention of vengeance against Conti. Was hidden wrath from the past two years affecting the present?

Once on that path of doubts, Beatrix did not pause. She paced, sat, tried to decide, unable to; she remained prey to indecision until dinner, when she rose hastily and went downstairs without dressing. As Camille saw her in a morning gown, with chilling air and taciturn manner, she felt a crisis had come. Beatrix’s look indicated the coming hostilities of an embittered heart.

Camille instantly left the room and gave the order surprising Calyste; she feared he might arrive amid the quarrel and wished to fight alone, without witnesses. Beatrix alone would infallibly succumb. Camille knew the other’s soul was barren and pride petty and obstinate.

The dinner was gloomy. Camille was gentle and kind; she felt superior. Beatrix was hard and cutting; she felt managed like a child. The battle began with glances, gestures, half-spoken sentences—insufficient to enlighten servants but enough to prepare an observer for the storm. When they rose, Camille offered her arm maliciously to Beatrix, who pretended not to see and sprang up the stair alone. After coffee, Mademoiselle des Touches dismissed the footman with “You may go”—a brief sentence serving as their signal.

“The novels you make, my dear, are more dangerous than those you write,” said the marquise.

“They have one advantage, however,” Camille replied, lighting a cigarette.

“What is that?” asked Beatrix.

“They are unpublished, my angel.”

“Is the one in which you are putting me to be turned into a book?”

“I’ve no fancy for the role of Oedipus; I know you have the wit and beauty of a sphinx, but don’t propound conundrums. Speak out plainly, my dear Beatrix.”

“When, to make a man happy, amuse him, please him, and save him from ennui, we let the devil help us—”

“That man would reproach us later for our efforts and would think them prompted by the genius of depravity,” interrupted Camille, taking the cigarette from her lips.

“He forgets the love that carried us away; that’s our sole justification—but men are unjust and ungrateful,” Beatrix continued. “Women know each other; they know how proud and noble their minds are, and—frankly—how virtuous! But, Camille, I’ve just recognized some criticisms of your nature you’ve sometimes complained of. You have something of the man about you; you behave like a man; nothing restrains you; if you haven’t all a man’s advantages, you have his spirit and his contempt for women. I have no reason to be satisfied with you and am too frank to hide my dissatisfaction. No one has ever given or will give so cruel a wound as the one I now suffer. If you are not a woman in love, you are one in vengeance. It takes a woman of genius to find the most sensitive spot in another woman’s delicacy. I speak now of Calyste and the trickery—you have employed against me. To what depths have you descended, Camille Maupin! and why?”

“More and more sphinx-like!” said Camille, smiling.

“You want me to fling myself at Calyste’s head; but I am still too young for that. To me, love is sacred; love is love with all its emotions, jealousies, and despotisms. I am not an author; I cannot see ideas where the heart feels sentiments.”

“You think yourself capable of loving foolishly!” said Camille. “Make yourself easy; you have plenty of sense. You calumniate yourself; your nature is cold enough to let your head judge your heart.”

The marquise colored; she darted a venomous look and found the sharpest arrows in her quiver. Camille smoked composedly as Beatrix launched a furious tirade and even attacked Camille’s age.

“Is that all?” said Félicité, when Beatrix paused, letting smoke exhale.

“Do you love Calyste?”

“No; of course not.”

“So much the better,” Camille replied. “I do love him—far too much for my peace of mind. He may perhaps have had a passing fancy for you; for you are enchantingly fair, while I am as black as a crow; you are slim and willowy, while I have portly dignity; in short, you are young!—that’s the final word, and you have not spared it to me. You have abused your advantages as a woman against me. I have done my best to prevent what has now happened. However little woman you may think me, I am woman enough not to allow a rival to triumph unless I choose to help her.” (This remark, apparently innocent, cut the marquise to the heart.) “You take me for a very silly person if you believe all that Calyste tries to make you think of me. I am neither so great nor so small; I am a woman, and very much of a woman. Come, put off your grand airs, and give me your hand!” Camille took Madame de Rochefide’s hand. “You do not love Calyste, you say; that is true, is it not? Don’t be angry; be hard, cold, and stern to him tomorrow; he will end by submitting, especially after certain reproaches I mean to make. Still, Calyste is a Breton, and very persistent; if he continues to court you, tell me frankly, and I will lend you my little country house near Paris, where you will find comforts, and where Conti can come out and see you. You said Calyste calumniated me. Good heavens! what of that? The purest love lies twenty times a day; its deceptions prove its strength.”

Camille’s superb disdain frightened Beatrix, who did not know how to answer. Camille dealt a last blow.

“I am more confiding and less bitter than you,” she said. “I don’t suspect you of attempting to cover by a quarrel a secret injury that would compromise my life. You know me; I shall never survive the loss of Calyste, but I must lose him sooner or later. Still, Calyste loves me now; of that I am sure.”

“Here is what he answered to my letter urging him to be true to you,” said Beatrix, holding out Calyste’s last letter.

Camille read it; her eyes filled with tears; presently she wept as women weep in their bitterest sorrows.

“My God!” she said, “how he loves her! I shall die without being understood—or loved,” she added.

She sat with her head on Beatrix’s shoulder; her grief was genuine, the same terrible blow the Baronne du Guenic had felt reading that letter.

“Do you love him?” she asked, looking fixedly at Beatrix. “Have you that infinite worship for him which triumphs over all pains, survives contempt, betrayal, the certainty that he will never love you? Do you love him for himself, and for the joy of loving him?”

“Dear friend,” said the marquise tenderly, “be happy, be at peace; I will leave this place tomorrow.”

“No, do not go; he loves you, I see that. Well, I love him so much I could not endure to see him wretched. I had formed plans, projects; but if he loves you, all is over.”

“And I love him, Camille,” said the marquise, with some naïveté and coloring.

“You love him, and yet you cast him off!” cried Camille. “Ah! that is not loving; you do not love him.”

“I don’t know what fresh virtue he has roused in me, but certainly he has made me ashamed of myself,” said Beatrix. “I would I were virtuous and free, to give him something better than the dregs of a heart and the weight of my chains. I do not want a hampered destiny for him or myself.”

“Cold brain!” exclaimed Camille, with horror. “To love and calculate!”

“Call it what you like,” Beatrix replied, “but I will not spoil his life, or hang like a millstone round his neck to become an eternal regret. If I cannot be his wife, I shall not be his mistress. He has— you will laugh? No? Well, then, he has purified me.”

Camille cast the most sullen, savage look female jealousy can cast.

“On that ground, I believed I stood alone,” she said. “Beatrix, those words must separate us forever; we are no longer friends. Here begins a terrible conflict between us. I tell you now; you will either succumb or fly.”

So saying, Camille bounded into her room, showing the maddened-lioness’s face to astonished Beatrix, then raised the portière and looked back in.

“Do you intend to go to Croisic tomorrow?” she asked.

“Certainly,” replied Beatrix proudly. “I shall not fly, and I shall not succumb.”

“I play above board,” replied Camille; “I shall write to Conti.”

Beatrix turned as white as her gauze scarf.

“We are staking our lives on this game,” she murmured, not knowing what to say or do.

The violent passions roused by this scene calmed during the night. Both argued with themselves and returned to the temporizing courses attractive to most women—an excellent system between men and women, but fatally unsafe among women alone. In the midst of this tumult Mademoiselle des Touches listened to that great Voice whose counsels subdue the strongest will; Beatrix heard only the promptings of worldly wisdom; she feared society’s contempt.

Thus Félicité’s last deception succeeded; Calyste’s blunder was repaired, but a fresh indiscretion might yet be fatal to him.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
It was the end of August, and the sky was magnificently clear. Near the horizon the sea had the molten-silver tint of southern waters; on the shore it rippled in tiny waves. A glowing vapor from the sun on the sands produced an almost tropical atmosphere. Salt gleamed like bunches of white violets on the marsh surface. The patient paludiers, dressed in white against the sun and armed with long rakes, had been at their posts since morning. Some leaned on the low mud-walls dividing the holdings, watching the salt-making known to them from childhood; others played with their wives and children. The custom-house officers smoked their pipes with calm.

The scene had an exotic air; a Parisian suddenly transported here would hardly guess he was in France. The baron and baroness, who had feigned interest in the salt harvest, stood on the jetty admiring the silent landscape where only the sea sounded, and where boats and the cultivated green girdle of earth made a rare charm on the ocean shore.

“Well, my friends, I wanted to see the marshes of Guerande once more before I die,” said the baron to the paludiers gathered at the marsh entrance.

“Can a Guenic die?” replied one.

The party from Les Touches arrived by the narrow path. The marquise walked first alone; Calyste and Camille followed arm-in-arm, Gasselin bringing up the rear.

“There are my father and mother,” Calyste said to Camille.

The marquise stopped. Madame du Guenic felt the strongest repulsion for Beatrix, though Beatrix was well dressed: a wide Leghorn hat with bluebells, crimped hair, a gray wool gown and a blue sash gave her the air of a princess disguised as a milkmaid.

“She has no heart,” thought the baroness.

“Mademoiselle,” Calyste said to Camille, “this is Madame du Guenic, and this is my father.” Then to the baron and baroness: “Mademoiselle des Touches, and Madame la Marquise de Rochefide, née de Casteran, father.”

The baron bowed; Mademoiselle des Touches made a respectful bow full of gratitude to the baroness.

“That one,” Fanny thought, “really loves my boy; she seems to thank me for bringing him into the world.”

“I suppose you have come to see, as I have, whether the harvest is a good one. But I believe you have better reasons,” said the baron to Camille. “You have property here, I think.”

“Mademoiselle is the largest owner,” said one of the paludiers, “and may God preserve her to us, for she’s a good lady.”

The parties bowed and separated.

“No one would suppose Mademoiselle des Touches to be more than thirty,” said the baron. “She is very handsome. And Calyste prefers that haggard Parisian marquise to a sound Breton girl!”

“I fear he does,” replied the baroness.

A boat awaited at the jetty steps; the party embarked in silence. The marquise was cold and dignified. Camille had lectured Calyste on his disobedience, making the situation clear. Calyste, in black despair, cast glances at Beatrix where anger and love struggled. Not a word was spoken during the short passage from the jetty of Guerande to the port of Croisic, where salt is discharged and peasant-women carry it away in earthen jars on their heads. These women, barefoot with short petticoats, sometimes let their kerchiefs fly open; some wearing only shifts appeared more dignified, for their modest bearing seemed nobler with less clothing.

The little Danish vessel had just finished lading; the landing of two handsome ladies excited curiosity among the salt-carriers. To avoid their remarks and to serve Calyste, Camille sprang toward the rocks, leaving him to follow with Beatrix. Gasselin put distance between himself and his master.

The Croisic peninsula is flanked by granite rocks whose fantastic shapes defy easy comparison. The rocks form interminable arabesques and the imagination tires amid this gallery of abnormal shapes, where the sea in storm polishes the forms. Under a natural vaulted roof, like a bold effect art imitates, is a rocky hollow polished like a marble bathtub floored with white sand and tepid water safe for bathing. Cool little covers sheltered by great portals, roughly carved but majestic, recall palaces that imitate nature’s whims. Curious features are innumerable.

There is one rare thing here: a large box-bush, perhaps unique on such rocky shores, three miles from the harbor on the point of rocks that runs far into the sea. On a granite promontory, high and out of the spray, chance or birds have placed enough vegetable earth for this compact plant, whose roots indicate an existence of perhaps three hundred years. Above it the rock breaks off abruptly; the convulsion that did this left traces marked here.

The sea rushes to the foot of this cliff, which rises four or five hundred feet; scattered rocks at its base describe a semi-circle. It takes nerve to climb this little Gibraltar whose summit resembles old castle look-out towers. From it you see the clock towers and arid fields of Croisic, the sandy dunes that injure cultivation stretching to Batz. Sardine fishers gave the rock a Breton name best not written here.

Calyste led Beatrix to this point, where the view is magnificent and where the granite’s sculpture is even more imposing close at hand.

Camille, like a wounded wild animal longing for solitude, threaded the fissures and caves of nature’s fortress. Not to be hampered in climbing, she wore trousers with frilled edges, a short blouse, a peaked cap, and carried a riding-whip. In this attire she looked handsomer than Beatrix; she wore a little crimson China crape shawl crossed on her bosom and tied behind like a child. For some time Beatrix and Calyste saw her flitting over peaks and chasms like a ghost; she tried to still inward sufferings by confronting imaginary peril.

Camille was first to reach the rock where the box-bush grew. She sat in the shade, lost in thought. What could a woman like her do with old age, having already drunk the cup of fame too eagerly? There, on that spot, a singular reflection—one of those chance accidents that open vast depths of thought to noble souls—decided her to take an extraordinary step to part forever from social life.

She drew from her pocket a little box of strawberry lozenges, ate several, and thought: the strawberries no longer exist, yet live in their qualities. Was it not so with ourselves? The ocean was an image of the infinite. No great spirit can face the infinite and admit immortality without the conviction of a future of holiness. The thought filled her. How petty then seemed the part she had been playing! There was no true greatness in giving Beatrix to Calyste. Thinking so, the earthly woman died within her; the noble and angelic being veiled by flesh arose. Her mind, knowledge, attainments, and false loves confronted the bounteous mother and comforter of troubled spirits—the Roman Church—poetic to poets, childlike with children, and profound to anxious souls. She saw her love for Calyste as a divine messenger who had turned earthly desire to divine love.

After walking in silence, Calyste could not refrain from comparing the ocean’s depth and purity with his love when Beatrix remarked on the ocean’s grandeur, unlike the Mediterranean.

“It is met by a rock!” said Beatrix, laughing.

“When you speak thus,” he answered with a sublime look, “I hear you, I see you, and I can summon the patience of the angels; but when I am alone, you would pity me if you could see me then. My mother weeps for my suffering.”

“Listen to me, Calyste; we must put an end to all this,” said the marquise, gazing down upon the sandy plain. “Perhaps this is the only propitious place to say these things, for never in my life did I see nature more in keeping with my thoughts. I have seen Italy, where all tells of love; Switzerland, where all is cool and fresh and tells of labor’s happiness; but I have never seen anything that so depicts the burning barrenness of my life as that arid plain dried by salt winds, corroded by spray, where fruitless agriculture struggles against the ocean. There, Calyste, you have an image of this Beatrix. Don’t cling to it. I love you, but I will never be yours in any way, for I have the sense of my inward desolation. No, you shall never see your idol diminished; she shall never fall from the height at which you have placed her. I now have a horror of love which disregards the world and religion. I shall remain in my present bonds; I shall be that sandy plain—without fruit or flowers.”

“But if you are abandoned?” said Calyste.

“Then I should beg my pardon of the man I have offended. I will never risk taking a happiness I know would quickly end.”

“End!” cried Calyste.

The marquise repeated the word in a tone that silenced him. This opposition roused in Calyste a mute inward fury known only to those who love without hope. They walked for several hundred steps in silence, looking neither at sea nor rocks nor plain.

“I would make you happy,” said Calyste.

“All men begin by promising that,” she answered. “They end by abandonment and disgust. I have no reproach to cast on him to whom I shall be faithful. He made me no promises; I went to him; but my only means of lessening my fault is to make it eternal.”

“Say rather,” he cried, “that you feel no love for me. I, who love you, know love cannot argue; it is itself; it sees nothing else. There is no sacrifice I will not make to you; command it, and I will do the impossible. He who despised his mistress for flinging her glove among the lions and ordered him to bring it back did not love—he denied the right to test our hearts and to yield only to our utmost devotion. I will sacrifice my family, my name, my future.”

“What an insult in that word ‘sacrifice’!” she said reproachfully, which made Calyste feel the folly of his speech.

“You are right,” he replied, letting fall a tear; “that word can only be said of the cruel struggles you ask of me.”

“Hush!” said Beatrix, struck by an answer in which, for the first time, Calyste had really made her feel his love. “I have done wrong enough; tempt me no more.”

They reached the base of the rock where the box grew. Calyste helped her ascend the steep slope; to the poor lad it was a precious privilege to support her. This turned his head; he saw nothing but Beatrix and clasped her round the waist.

“What!” she said with an imposing air.

“Will you never be mine?” he demanded, voice choked with tumult.

“Never, my friend,” she replied. “I can only be to you a Beatrix—a dream. But is that not sweet and tender? We shall have no bitterness, no grief, no repentance.”

“Will you return to Conti?”

“I must.”

“You shall never belong to any man!” cried Calyste, pushing her with frenzied violence.

He listened for her fall, intending to spring after her, but heard only a muffled sound: the tearing of some stuff and then the thud of a body. Instead of being flung headlong down the precipice, Beatrix had slipped eight or ten feet into the cavity where the box-bush grew; her gown caught on a rock point and, tearing slowly, lowered her onto the bush.

Mademoiselle des Touches, horrified, could not cry out but signed to Gasselin to come. Calyste leaned forward, his expression savage curiosity; he saw Beatrix’s position and shuddered. Her lips moved—she seemed to be praying; she thought she was about to die as the bush began to give. With youth’s agility Calyste slid down to the ledge below the bush, grasped the marquise and held her though both risked sliding into the sea. She had fainted; in that aerial spot he fancied her wholly his, and his first emotion was pleasure.

“Open your eyes,” he said, “and forgive me; we will die together.”

“Die?” she said, opening her eyes and unclosing pallid lips.

Calyste welcomed the word with a kiss, and felt her tremble convulsively with passionate joy. At that instant Gasselin’s hob-nailed shoes sounded above them. The old Breton was followed by Camille; together they sought a way to save the lovers.

“There is but one way, mademoiselle,” said Gasselin. “I must slide down there; they can climb on my shoulders; you must pull them up.”

“And you?” said Camille.

The man seemed surprised to be considered. “You must go to Croisic and fetch a ladder,” she answered.

Beatrix asked to be laid down; Calyste placed her on the narrow space between the bush and rock. “I saw you, Calyste,” Camille said from above. “Whether Beatrix lives or dies, remember that this must be an accident.”

“She will hate me,” he said, moist-eyed.

“She will adore you,” replied Camille. “But this puts an end to our excursion. We must get her back to Les Touches. Had she been killed, Calyste, what would have become of you?”

“I should have followed her.”

“And your mother? And me?” After a pause she added feebly.

Calyste stood pale and silent. Gasselin returned from a nearby farm with a ladder. By then Beatrix had recovered somewhat. With the ladder placed and Gasselin lowering Camille’s red shawl for her to grasp, Beatrix reached the top where the Breton took her in his arms and carried her to the shore like an infant.

“I should not have said no to death—but suffering!” she murmured to Felicite, weak.

The marquise’s prostration obliged Camille to have her taken to the farmhouse from which the ladder had been borrowed. Calyste, Gasselin and Camille made a litter from spare clothes on the ladder and carried Beatrix; the farmers gave her a bed. Gasselin rode to Croisic for a doctor, telling the boatman to row to the nearest landing.

Calyste sat on a stool answering with head motions and rare monosyllables; Camille’s uneasiness at Beatrix’s condition grew with Calyste’s unnatural state. The physician bled Beatrix; she improved and consented to embark, and by five o’clock they reached the jetty at Guerande whence she was carried to Les Touches. News of the accident had already spread widely.

Calyste passed the night at Les Touches, sitting at the foot of Beatrix’s bed with Camille. The doctor had assured them that only slight stiffness would remain. Through Calyste’s despair there came a gleam of joy: he was there at her feet, could watch her sleep or wake, study her pallid face and expressions. Camille recognized in Calyste a passion one feels but once—a passion that dyes a man’s soul and faculties when nothing else distracts him. She saw he would never see the real woman in Beatrix.

How guileless Calyste was: when he saw Beatrix’s green eyes turned to him with love, confusion, and mischief, he colored and turned away.

“Did I not say truly, Calyste, that you men promise happiness and end by flinging us down a precipice?” Beatrix jested sweetly.

Calyste knelt, took her moist hand, and kissed it humbly. “You have the right to reject my love forever,” he said. “I have no right to say a word.”

“Ah!” cried Camille, seeing Beatrix’s expression and comparing it to the results of her diplomacy, “love has a wit of its own, wiser than that of all the world! Take your composing-draught, my dear friend, and go to sleep.”

That night at Les Touches left ineffaceable marks on Calyste, who had read Indiana—the work of Camille’s rival—while Mademoiselle des Touches read theological mysticism. Felicite soothed Calyste with the assurance that unless a woman were a monster she must be flattered by being the object of such a crime.

“You would never have flung me into the water,” said Camille, brushing away a tear.

Toward morning Calyste, worn out, fell asleep in his arm-chair; the marquise watched his pale, charming face and heard him murmur her name as he slept.

“He loves while sleeping,” she said to Camille.

“We must send him home,” said Felicite, waking him.

No one at the hotel du Guenic was anxious; Mademoiselle des Touches had written to the baroness about the accident.

Calyste returned to dinner at Les Touches and found Beatrix up and dressed, though pale and feeble. The harshness and coldness were gone. After an evening of music by Camille, who left Calyste free to take and press Beatrix’s hands, no storms occurred at Les Touches. Felicite completely effaced herself.

Cold, fragile, hard women like Madame de Rochefide—women whose necks have a feline turn—have pale souls; to melt them needs a thunderbolt. To Beatrix, Calyste’s fury of love and his mad action were that thunderbolt. She felt inwardly humbled; a true, pure love bathed her heart. She breathed a genial atmosphere of feelings hitherto unknown to her; she felt magnified, elevated—raised to the heaven Bretons place the Woman in. She relished the respectful adoration of the youth, whose happiness cost her little: a gesture, a look, a word satisfied him. The value Calyste placed on trifles touched her; to hold her gloved hand meant more to him than possession meant to another man. What a contrast between them!

Few women could resist such constant deification. Beatrix felt sure of being obeyed and understood; she could ask Calyste to risk his life for a caprice and he would do it without reflection. This gave her a noble and imposing air. She saw love in its grandeur and sought to remain forever the loftiest of women in his eyes.

Her coquetries grew persistent because she felt an inward weakness. She played the invalid for a week with charming hypocrisy, leaning on Calyste’s arm in languid dependence as they walked between house and garden on the velvet turf.

Before the Croisic excursion the two women had talked about love, laughing at the ways men declare it; they admitted the cleverest men, naturally the least loving, often go straight to the point. “They go to work like La Fontaine when he wanted to enter the Academy,” said Camille.

Madame de Rochefide had unbounded power to restrain Calyste by reminding him of his violence on the rocks; a look from her made his eyes fill with tears and he swallowed his prayers and arguments. By infernal coquetry she finally brought him to seek Camille’s advice.

Beatrix, armed with Calyste’s own letter, quoted his axiom that to love was the first happiness and to be loved came later; she used it to restrain his passion within respectful idolatry, which suited her. She liked the sweet hymns of praise and adoration that youth offers; she gave no definite answer. Love was not yet the question; he asked only permission to love. Calyste still clung to love’s spiritual side; that was his sublime devotion.

Nevertheless, driven to despair, Calyste complained to Camille.

“I meant to cure you by making you quickly understand her,” she replied; “but you have spoiled all. Ten days ago you were her master; to-day you are her slave. You will never have the strength to do as I advise.”

“What ought I to do?”

“Quarrel with her over her hardness. A woman is always over-excited when she discusses; let her be angry and ill-treat you, then stay away; do not return to Les Touches till she recalls you.”

In extreme illness there is a moment when the patient accepts cruel remedies. Calyste had reached that point. He followed Camille’s advice and stayed away two days; on the third he scratched at Beatrix’s door to let her know he and Camille were waiting breakfast for her.

“Another chance lost!” Camille said when she saw him reappear weakly.

During his absence Beatrix often looked through the window toward the road to Guerande. When Camille found her doing so she talked of the gorse’s golden blooms along the roadway, dazzling in the September sun.

The marquise kept them waiting long for breakfast; when she appeared, her dress showed evident intention to fascinate him and prevent another absence. After breakfast she walked with him in the garden and filled his simple heart with joy by expressing a wish to return to the rock where she had nearly perished.

“Will you go with me alone?” asked Calyste.

“If I refused, I should give you reason to think I found you dangerous. Alas! as I have told you, I belong to another, and I must be his only. I chose him knowing nothing of love. The fault was great, and bitter is my punishment.”

When she spoke thus with moist eyes, Calyste was filled with compassion that tempered his ardor; he adored her as he might a Madonna. Beatrix was undergoing an inward struggle, hesitating between herself and Calyste—between the world she hoped to re-enter and the young happiness offered to her. She began, therefore, to listen to his blind passion and allowed his soft pity to soothe her. Several times she was moved to tears as she listened and suffered him to commiserate her being bound to an evil genius like Conti. Camille had told Calyste of Beatrix’s misery in Italy and given him lectures he profited from.

“I will love you absolutely,” he said. “I have no triumphs of art to offer you; my only talent is to love you. My honor, my pride are in your perfections. No other woman can have merit in my eyes; you have no odious rival to fear. You are misconceived and wronged; for every wrong I will make you feel my comprehension day by day.”

She listened with bowed head, letting him kiss her hands and admitting silently that she was indeed an angel misunderstood.

“I am too humiliated,” she said. “My past has robbed the future of all security.”

It was a glorious day for Calyste when, arriving at Les Touches at seven, he saw Beatrix at a window watching for him, wearing the same straw hat from their memorable first excursion. For a moment he was dazzled; such small things of passion magnify the world.

They left Les Touches by the garden gate onto the dunes. Beatrix loved the sands, gathered hardy little plants with rose-colored flowers to mix with Chartreux pansies and divide with Calyste—those flowers were to be an eternal, dreadful relic.

“We’ll add a bit of box,” she said smiling.

They sat on the jetty awaiting the boat; Calyste told her of his juvenile escapade on the day of her arrival.

“I knew of your little escapade,” she said, “and it was the cause of my sternness to you that first night.”

During their walk her tone was lightly jesting with tenderness. Calyste had reason to think himself beloved. At a charming creek strewn with brilliant pebbles, when Calyste, at the summit of happiness, asked her plainly to fly with him to Ireland, she resumed her distant air, asked for his arm, and continued in silence to her Tarpeian rock.

“My friend,” she said mounting the magnificent block of granite where she made herself a pedestal, “I have not the courage to conceal what you are to me. For ten years I have had no happiness comparable to searching for shells with you and exchanging pebbles for the necklace I will treasure more than diamonds. I have been a little girl again, such as I was at fourteen or sixteen—when I was worthy of you. The love I have inspired in you has raised me in my own eyes. Understand these words.”

They reached the rock’s summit, seeing the vast ocean on one side and Brittany on the other. “But,” she continued, “I do not belong to myself; I am more bound by my own will than by law. You must be punished for my misdeed, but be satisfied to know we suffer together. Dante never saw his Beatrice again; Petrarch never had his Laura. Such disasters fall only on noble souls. But if I should be abandoned, if I fall lower into shame and ignominy and your Beatrix is cruelly misjudged, then, my adored child,” she said taking his hand, “to you she will still be first of all; you will see she rises to heaven as she leans on you; but then, if you wish to cast her down do not fail of your blow; after your love, death!”

Calyste clasped her round the waist and pressed her to his heart. As if to confirm her words, Beatrix laid a tender, timid kiss on his brow. Walking back like those who perfectly understand each other—she thinking she had gained a truce, he not doubting his happiness—both were deceived. Calyste, believing from Camille’s information that Conti might be pleased to part from Beatrix, looked to chance to arrange the future; Beatrix yielded to the vagueness of her position.

They reached Les Touches in bliss, entering by the garden gate whose key Calyste had taken. It was nearly six; the evening’s odors and sun harmonized with their feelings. Their steps were in unison, their silence full of mutual completeness. Having said all that could be said and physically tired, they walked on in silence.

Suddenly, at a turn, Beatrix was seized with a horrible trembling, the contagious horror caused by the sight of a snake, which Calyste felt before he saw the cause: on a bench beneath a weeping ash sat Conti, talking with Camille Maupin.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The marquise’s inward, convulsive trembling showed more than she wished; a tragic drama unfolded in the souls of all present.

“You did not expect me so soon, I fancy,” said Conti, offering his arm to Beatrix.

The marquise could not avoid dropping Calyste’s arm and taking Conti’s. This ignoble transit, imperiously demanded and so dishonoring to the new love, overwhelmed Calyste, who threw himself on the bench beside Camille after exchanging the coldest salutations with his rival. Torn by conflicting emotions, he first thought to fling himself upon Conti and claim Beatrix; but the violent trembling of the woman betrayed her suffering—she had in that moment paid the penalty of her faults—and this so affected him that he was dumb, struck like her with a sense of some implacable necessity.

Madame de Rochefide and Conti passed in front of the seat where Calyste had dropped beside Camille, and as she passed the marquise gave Camille one of those terrible glances in which women say everything. She avoided Calyste’s eyes and turned to Conti, who appeared to be jesting with her.

“What will they say to each other?” Calyste asked Camille.

“Dear child, you don’t yet know the terrible rights an extinguished love still gives a man over a woman. Beatrix could not refuse to take his arm. He is surely jesting her about her new love; he must have guessed it from your attitudes and the way you approached us.”

“Jesting her!” cried the impetuous youth, starting up.

“Be calm,” Camille advised. “If he wounds her self-love, she will crush him. But Conti is too astute; he will manage her more cleverly. He will seem not to suppose that the proud Madame de Rochefide could betray him; he will represent you as an ambitious child wanting a marquise in love with him, making himself the arbiter of two women’s fates. In short, he will fire a broadside of malicious insinuations. Beatrix will be forced to parry with denials, which he will use to become once more her master.”

“Ah! he does not love her. I would leave her free. True love must be chosen anew each moment. Why did he not stay away longer? A few more days and he would not have found her. What brought him back?”

“The jest of a journalist,” replied Camille. “His opera has failed. Some journalist, probably Claude Vignon, remarked: ‘It is hard to lose fame and mistress at the same moment,’ and the speech cut him. Love based on petty sentiments is always pitiless. I have questioned him; but who can fathom so false a nature? He appeared weary of troubles and disgusted with life. He regrets his public alliance with the marquise, and spoke to me of past happiness in a melancholy poem too clever to be true. I think he hoped to worm out of me the secret of your love amid my expected flatteries.”

“What else?” said Calyste, watching Beatrix and Conti, who were coming toward them; but he no longer listened to Camille’s words.

In talking with Conti, Camille had held herself prudently on the defensive; she betrayed neither Calyste’s secret nor Beatrix’s. The great artist was capable of treachery to everyone, and Mademoiselle des Touches warned Calyste to distrust him.

“My dear friend,” she said, “this is the most critical moment for you. You need the caution and cleverness you do not possess; I fear you will be tricked by the most wily man I have ever known, and I can do nothing to help you.”

The dinner bell rang. Conti offered his arm to Camille; Calyste gave his to Beatrix. Camille stepped back to let the marquise pass, but Beatrix found a moment to look at Calyste and, by putting her finger on her lips, impressed upon him the absolute necessity of discretion.

Conti was extremely gay during dinner; perhaps this was one way of probing Madame de Rochefide, who played her part ill. If her conduct had been mere coquetry she might have deceived Conti; but her new love was real and betrayed her. The wily musician, far from increasing her embarrassment, pretended not to notice it. At dessert he steered the conversation to women and lauded the nobility of their sentiments. He said many women who might abandon a man in prosperity would sacrifice all in misfortune; women were constant, clung to their first lover as honor required, and so on. His praises, meant to wound, fell like incense on the altar where one bleeding heart lay. Camille and Beatrix alone understood the bitterness beneath the eulogy. They flushed at times, but forced themselves to control it. When dinner ended, they took each other’s arms to return to Camille’s salon, and, as if by mutual consent, turned aside into the great salon to be alone for a moment in darkness.

“It is dreadful to let Conti ride over me; yet I can’t defend myself,” said Beatrix in a low voice. “The galley-slave is always a slave to his chain-companion. I am lost; I must needs return to my galleys! And it is you, Camille, who have cast me there! Ah! you brought him back a day too soon, or a day too late. I recognize your infernal talent as author. Well, your revenge is complete, the finale perfect!”

“I may have told you I would write to Conti, but to do it was another matter,” cried Camille. “I am incapable of such baseness. But you are unhappy, and I forgive the suspicion.”

“What will become of Calyste?” asked the marquise, with naive self-conceit.

“Then Conti carries you off, does he?” Camille asked.

“Ah! you think you triumph!” cried Beatrix.

Anger distorted her handsome face as she spoke to Camille, who tried to hide satisfaction under a false expression of sympathy. The sparkle in Camille’s eyes belied the sadness of her face, and Beatrix, learned in such deceptions, saw through it. When, a few moments later, the two women sat under a strong light on that divan where the first three weeks had hosted so many comedies and where so many secret tragedies began, they examined each other for the last time and felt forever parted by undying hatred.

“Calyste remains to you,” said Beatrix, looking into Camille’s eyes; “but I am fixed in his heart, and no woman can ever drive me out of it.”

Camille replied, with an ironical tone that struck the marquise to the heart, in the famous words of Mazarin’s niece to Louis XIV: “You reign, you love, and you depart!”

Neither Camille nor Beatrix was conscious during this sharp, bitter scene of the absence of Conti and Calyste. The composer had remained at table with his rival, begging him to keep him company in finishing a bottle of champagne.

“We have something to say to each other,” added Conti, to prevent refusal.

Placed as they were, the young Breton could not refuse this challenge.

“My dear friend,” said the composer in his most caressing voice as the poor lad had drunk a couple of glasses, “we are both good fellows and can speak frankly. I have not come suspiciously. Beatrix loves me,”—with a gesture of self-conceit—“but the truth is, I have ceased to love her. I am not here to carry her off with me, but to break off our relations and leave her the honors of the rupture. You are young; you don’t yet know how useful it is to appear the victim when you are the executioner. Young men spit fire; they leave a woman with fury; they often despise her and make her hate them. But wise men do as I do; they get themselves dismissed, assuming mortification, which leaves regret in the woman’s heart and a sense of her superiority. You don’t know how hampered men often are by rash promises women accept when gallantry obliges us to make nooses for our happiness. We swear eternal faithfulness and seem to await a husband’s death impatiently; let him die, and some provincial women say: ‘Here am I, free at last.’ The spent ball comes to life again at our triumphs. I have seen that you love Beatrix. I leave her in a position where she loses nothing of her majesty; she will certainly coquet with you, if only to tease that angel Camille Maupin. Well, take her, love her—you’ll do me a great service; I want her to turn against me. I have feared her pride and virtue. Perhaps it will take time to effect this chassez-croisez. On such occasions the wisest plan is to take no step at all. I did just now, walking on the lawn, attempt to let her see I knew all and was ready to congratulate her on her new happiness. Well, she was furious! At this moment I am desperately in love with a prima donna, Mademoiselle Falcon of the Grand Opera. I think of marrying her; yes, I have got as far as that. When you come to Paris you will see I have changed a marquise for a queen.”

Calyste’s candid face revealed his satisfaction; he admitted his love for Beatrix, which was all Conti wanted to discover. No man, however blasé, will not flame up again when his love is threatened by a rival. He may wish to leave a woman, but he will never willingly let her leave him. When lovers reach this extremity, both strive for priority of action, so deep is the wound to their vanity. Questioned by the composer, Calyste related all that had happened during the last three weeks at Les Touches; Conti, concealing fury under charming good-humor, took it all in good part.

“Come, let us go upstairs,” said Conti. “Women are so distrustful; those two will wonder how we can sit here together without tearing each other’s hair out; they might even come down to listen. I’ll serve you faithfully, my dear boy. You’ll see me rough and jealous with the marquise; I shall seem to suspect her; there’s no better way to drive a woman to betray you. You will be happy, and I shall be free. Seem to pity that angel for belonging to a man without delicacy; show her a tear—for you can weep, you are young. I, alas! can weep no more; and that’s a great advantage lost.”

Calyste and Conti went up to Camille’s salon. The composer, begged by his young rival to sing, gave them the greatest of musical masterpieces viewed as execution, the famous “Pria che spunti l’aurora,” which Rubini himself never attempted without trembling, and which had often been Conti’s triumph. Never was his singing more extraordinary than on this occasion, when so many feelings contended in his breast. Calyste was in ecstasy. As Conti sang the first words of the cavatina, he looked intently at the marquise, giving the words a cruel signification fully understood. Camille, who accompanied him, guessed the order thus conveyed, which bowed the head of the luckless Beatrix. She looked at Calyste and felt sure he had fallen into some trap despite her advice. This conviction became certainty when the evidently happy Breton came up to bid Beatrix good-night, kissing her hand with a little air of happy confidence.

By the time Calyste had reached Guerande, the servants were packing Conti’s traveling carriage, and “by dawn,” as the song had said, the composer was carrying Beatrix away with Camille’s horses to the first relay. The morning twilight enabled Madame de Rochefide to see Guerande, its towers whitened by the dawn, shining out upon the still dark sky. Melancholy thoughts possessed her; she was leaving there one of the sweetest flowers of her life—a pure love, such as a young girl dreams of; the only true love she had ever known or was ever to conceive. The woman of the world obeyed the laws of the world; she sacrificed love to their demands just as many women sacrifice it to religion or duty. Sometimes mere pride can rise in acts as high as virtue. Read thus, this history is that of many women.

The next morning Calyste went to Les Touches about mid-day. From the spot where, the day before, he had seen Beatrix watching at the window, he saw Camille, who ran down to him and told the cruel truth in one word: “Gone!”

“Beatrix?” asked Calyste, thunderstruck.

“You have been duped by Conti; you told me nothing, and I could do nothing for you.”

She led him to her little salon, where he flung himself on the divan where he had so often seen the marquise, and burst into tears. Felicite smoked her hookah and said nothing, knowing well that no words could arrest the first anguish of such pain, which is always deaf and dumb. Calyste, unable even to think, much less choose a course, sat all day in complete torpidity. Just before dinner, Camille tried to speak after begging him to listen.

“Friend,” she said, “you caused me the bitterest suffering, and I had not, like you, a beautiful young life before me in which to heal myself. For me, life has no longer any spring, nor my soul a love. So, to find consolation, I have had to look above. Here, in this room, the day before Beatrix came, I drew her portrait; I did not do her injustice, or you might have thought me jealous. I wanted you to know her as she is, for that would have kept you safe. Listen now to the full truth. Madame de Rochefide is wholly unworthy of you. The scandal of her fall was unnecessary; she did it deliberately to play a part in society. She is one of those women who prefer the celebrity of scandal to tranquil happiness; they fly in the face of society to obtain the fatal alms of rebuke; they desire to be talked about at any cost. Beatrix was eaten up with vanity. Her fortune and wit had not given her the feminine royalty she craved; they had not enabled her to reign supreme over a salon. She then bethought herself of seeking the celebrity of the Duchesse de Langeais and the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. But the world gives its interest to real feelings only. Beatrix playing comedy was judged second-rate. There was no reason for her flight; the sword of Damocles was not suspended over her. She is neither sincere, loving, nor tender; if she were, would she have gone away with Conti this morning?”

Camille talked long and eloquently; but this last effort to open Calyste’s eyes was useless, and she said no more when he expressed by a gesture his absolute belief in Beatrix.

She forced him to come down into the dining-room and sit while she dined; though he could not swallow food. It is only during extreme youth that such bodily contractions occur. Later, the organs acquire fixed habits and are hardened. The reaction of the mental system upon the physical is not enough to produce mortal illness unless the physical system retains its primitive purity. A man resists violent grief that kills a youth less by the greater weakness of his affection than by the greater strength of his organs.

Mademoiselle des Touches was greatly alarmed by the calm resignation Calyste showed after his burst of tears. Before he left, he asked permission to go into Beatrix’s bedroom, where he had seen her on the night of her illness, and there he laid his head on the pillow where hers had lain.

“I am committing follies,” he said, grasping Camille’s hand, and bidding her good-night in deep dejection.

He returned home to the usual company at mouche and spent the evening sitting beside his mother. The rector, the Chevalier du Halga, and Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel all knew of Madame de Rochefide’s departure and were rejoicing. Calyste would now return to them; they watched him cautiously. No one in that old manor imagined the result of a first love in a heart so simple and true as Calyste’s.

For several days Calyste went regularly to Les Touches. He paced the lawn where he had walked with Beatrix. He often went to Croisic to stand on that fateful rock or lie for hours in the box-bush; by studying footholds he had found a means of climbing. These solitary trips, his silence, his gravity, made his mother very anxious. After about two weeks, during which this caged-animal conduct lasted, the poor lover, caged in despair, ceased to cross the bay; he had scarcely strength to drag himself along the road from Guerande to the spot where he had seen Beatrix watching. The family, delighted at the departure of “those Parisians,” saw nothing fatal or diseased about the lad. The two old maids and the rector, pursuing their scheme, kept Charlotte de Kergarouet, who nightly played coquetries on Calyste, obtaining in return nothing better than advice in playing mouche. During long evenings Calyste sat between his mother and the little Breton girl, observed by the rector and Charlotte’s aunt, who discussed his mood as they walked home. Their simple minds mistook lethargic indifference for submission to their plans. One evening when Calyste, wearied, went off to bed, the players dropped their cards and looked at each other; they had heard his steps with anxiety.

“Something is the matter with Calyste,” said the baroness, wiping her eyes.

“Nothing is the matter,” replied Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel; “but you should marry him at once.”

“Do you think marriage would divert his mind?” asked the chevalier.

Charlotte, reproving the chevalier for moral laxity, was set up to urge the match. The next day Calyste saw Charlotte, who arrived with unusual care just after the baron had given him a discourse on matrimony to which he could not answer. He now knew the ignorance of his parents and friends; he had gathered the fruit of knowledge and felt isolated. He requested a few days’ grace. The old baron rubbed his hands with joy and whispered the “good news” to the baroness.

Breakfast was gay; Charlotte, hinted to by the baron, sparkled. After the meal Calyste took Charlotte to the grotto. Their parents watched from the window with a tenderness the young man could see.

“They are watching us,” Charlotte said.

“They cannot hear us,” he replied.

“True; but they see us.”

“Let us sit down, Charlotte,” he said, taking her hand.

“Is it true your banner used to float from that twisted column?” she asked, already thinking of owning the house. “You will make changes, won’t you, Calyste?”

“I shall not have time,” he said, taking her hands and kissing them. “I love someone you have seen and who loves me, and I cannot make any other woman happy; though from childhood you and I have been destined. But I shall wait.”

“And I, too,” Charlotte said, tears filling her eyes. “You cannot long love a married woman who, they say, has gone off with a singer—”

“Marry, Charlotte,” Calyste interrupted. “With the fortune your aunt intends to give you, you could choose some better man than I. I have brought you here not to tell you what you know, but to entreat you, as a childhood friend, to take this rupture upon yourself and say you have rejected me. Say you do not wish to marry a man whose heart is not free; thus I shall be spared the sense that I have done you public wrong. You do not know how heavy life is now; I cannot bear the slightest struggle; I am like a man whose vital spark is gone. If it were not for the grief I should cause my mother, I would have flung myself into the sea. Do not speak of this to any one. Good-bye, Charlotte.”

He kissed her hair and left by the postern-gate to Les Touches, remaining near Camille till past midnight. Returning home at one, he found his mother waiting with her worsted-work. Softly he clasped her hand and asked, “Is Charlotte gone?”

“She goes tomorrow, with her aunt, in despair,” answered the baroness. “Come to Ireland with me, my Calyste.”

“Many a time I have thought of flying there—”

“Ah!” cried the baroness.

“With Beatrix,” he added.

Some days after Charlotte’s departure, Calyste joined the Chevalier du Halga for his daily promenade. They sat on a bench where his eyes could wander from Les Touches to the rocks of Croisic, against which waves dashed. Calyste was thin and pale; his strength diminished; he felt shudders at intervals denoting fever. His eyes, surrounded by dark circles, had the singular brilliancy of a fixed idea. The chevalier was the only companion with whom he could exchange a few ideas; in him Calyste divined an apostle of his own religion and recognized vestiges of an eternal love.

“Have you loved many women?” he asked.

“Only one,” the chevalier replied.

“Was she free?”

“No,” exclaimed Du Halga. “Ah! how I suffered! She was the wife of my best friend—my protector—yet we loved each other so!”

“Did she love you?” Calyste asked.

“Passionately,” the chevalier replied fervently. “Until her death; she died at forty-nine during the emigration at St. Petersburg, the climate which killed her. She must be very cold in her coffin. I have thought of fetching her to Brittany and laying her near me! But she lies in my heart.”

The chevalier brushed away his tears. Calyste took his hand and pressed it.

“I care for this little dog more than for life,” the old man said, pointing to Thisbe. “The little darling is precisely like the one she held on her knees. I never look at Thisbe but I see Madame l’Amirale’s hands.”

“Did you see Madame de Rochefide?” Calyste asked.

“No,” replied the chevalier. “It is sixty-eight years since I have looked at any woman with attention—except your mother, who has some of Madame l’Amirale’s complexion.”

Three days later the chevalier said, “My child, I have a hundred and forty louis laid by. When you know where Madame de Rochefide is, come and get them and follow her.”

Calyste thanked him, envying his existence. But day by day he grew morose; he seemed to love no one; all things hurt him; he was gentle only to his mother. The baroness watched his progress into madness with increasing anxiety; by force of prayer and entreaty she made him swallow food. Toward the end of October the lad ceased to go to the mall; the chevalier came vainly to tempt him out.

“We can talk of Madame de Rochefide,” the old man would say. “I’ll tell you my first adventure.”

“Your son is ill,” he confided to the baroness when convinced efforts were useless.

Calyste answered questions that he was well; but like all youths in melancholy, he took pleasure in the thought of death. He no longer left the house but sat in the garden on a bench, warming himself in a pale sunshine, alone with his thought and avoiding companionship.

Soon after Calyste ceased even to go to Les Touches, Felicite asked the rector to come. The assiduity with which Abbe Grimont called at Les Touches became the great topic of the town. Still, the rector never missed an evening at the hotel du Guenic, where desolation reigned. Masters and servants were afflicted by Calyste’s increasing weakness though none imagined youth might die of love. Even the chevalier had no example of such a death among his memories. They attributed Calyste’s thinness to want of food. His mother implored him to eat. Calyste tried to conquer repugnance to comfort her; nourishment taken against his will only increased the slow fever now consuming him.

During the last days of October the cherished child could no longer mount the stairs; his bed was placed in the lower hall, surrounded by family. They finally sent for the Guerande physician, who broke the fever with quinine and reduced it in a few days, ordering Calyste to take exercise and find some amusement. The baron, roused from apathy, recovered some strength; with Calyste, Gasselin, and two dogs he started for the forest, and for days they hunted. Calyste obeyed, visiting neighbors’ chateaus. But he had no spirit or gaiety; nothing brought a smile. His livid, contracted features betrayed utter passivity. The baron, worn by exertion, returned home exhausted with Calyste almost as ill. For several days both were dangerously ill; the family sent, at the Guerande physician’s request, for two of the best doctors in Nantes.

The baron had received a fatal shock on realizing the change in Calyste. With the lucidity of the dying he trembled that his race was about to perish. He prayed, and his face turned constantly toward his son’s bed. At the least motion Calyste made, a commotion stirred within him. The baroness no longer left the room where Zephirine sat knitting in horrible uneasiness. Demands were made for wood and provisions; Zephirine, not nimble enough, gave her keys to Mariotte. But she insisted on knowing everything; she questioned Mariotte and her sister-in-law. One night, when father and son dozed, Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel told Zephirine she must resign herself to the baron’s death. The old woman dropped her knitting, groped, and drew from her pocket an old black chaplet, on which she prayed with a fervor that gave her withered face a new splendor; the other old woman imitated her, and all present, on a sign from the rector, joined in the spiritual uplift.

“Alas! I prayed to God,” said the baroness, remembering her prayer after reading Calyste’s fatal letter, “and he did not hear me.”

“Perhaps it would be well,” said the rector, “to beg Mademoiselle des Touches to come see Calyste.”

“She!” cried Zephirine, “the author of all our misery! She turned him from his family, taught him impious books, an heretical language! Let her be accursed! She has destroyed the du Guenics!”

“She may perhaps restore them,” the rector said gently. “Mademoiselle des Touches is a saintly woman; I am her surety. She has only good intentions toward Calyste.”

“Let me know the day she sets foot in this house, that I may get out of it,” cried the old woman passionately. “She has killed both father and son. Do you not hear death in Calyste’s voice? He is so feeble he barely whispers.”

At that moment the three doctors arrived. They plied Calyste with questions; their examination of the baron was short; they were surprised he still lived. The Guerande doctor calmly told the baroness that for Calyste it would probably be best to take him to Paris to consult the most experienced physicians; it would cost over a hundred louis.

“People die of something, but not of love,” said Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel.

“Alas! whatever be the cause, Calyste is dying,” said the baroness. “I see all the symptoms of consumption, that most horrible disease of my country, about him.”

“Calyste dying!” said the baron, opening his eyes; two large tears rolled slowly down his wrinkled cheeks—the only tears he had probably ever shed. Suddenly he rose, walked to his son’s bedside, took his hand, and looked earnestly at him.

“What is it you want, father?” said Calyste.

“That you should live!” cried the baron.

“I cannot live without Beatrix,” replied Calyste.

The old man dropped into a chair.

“Oh! where could we get a hundred louis to bring doctors from Paris? There is still time,” cried the baroness.

“A hundred louis!” cried Zephirine; “will that save him?”

Without waiting, the old maid ran her hands into her placket-holes, unfastened her petticoat, and let it fall, producing a heavy sound as coins tumbled. She knew where she had sewn her savings and ripped them out with the rapidity of magic. The gold pieces rang as they fell, one by one, into her lap. Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel gazed in amazement.

“But they’ll see you!” she whispered.

“Thirty-seven,” answered Zephirine, counting.

“Every one will know how much you have.”

“Forty-two.”

“Double louis! all new! How did you get them, you who can’t see clearly?”

“I felt them. Here’s one hundred and four louis,” cried Zephirine. “Is that enough?”

“What is all this?” asked the Chevalier du Halga, coming in, puzzled by the old blind friend holding a petticoat full of gold.

Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel explained.

“I knew it,” said the chevalier. “And I have come to bring a hundred and forty louis I have been holding at Calyste’s disposal, as he knows.”

The chevalier produced rouleaux from his pocket. Mariotte, seeing such wealth, sent Gasselin to lock the doors.

“Gold will not give him health,” said the baroness, weeping.

“But it can take him to Paris, where he can find her. Come, Calyste.”

“Yes,” cried Calyste, springing up, “I will go.”

“He will live,” said the baron, in a shaking voice; “and I can die—send for the rector!”

The words cast terror on all present. Calyste, seeing the mortal paleness on his father’s face, came to his side. The rector, after hearing the doctors, had gone to Mademoiselle des Touches intending to bring her back; in proportion as he had formerly detested her, he now admired and protected her as a shepherd protects the most precious of his flock.

When news of the baron’s approaching end spread in Guerande, a crowd gathered; peasants, paludiers, and servants knelt in the courtyard while the rector administered last sacraments to the old Breton warrior. The whole town was agitated by the probable extinction of this old Breton race; it was felt as a public calamity.

The solemn ceremony affected Calyste deeply. His filial sorrow silenced the anguish of his love for a moment. During the baron’s last hour he knelt beside him watching death come. The old man died in his chair in presence of the assembled family.

“I die faithful to God and his religion,” he said. “My God! as the reward of my efforts grant that Calyste may live!”

“I shall live, father, and I will obey you,” said the young man.

“If you wish to make my death as happy as Fanny has made my life, swear to me to marry.”

“I promise it, father.”

It was touching to see Calyste, or rather his shadow, leaning on the chevalier’s arm—a spectre leading a shade—following the baron’s coffin as chief mourner. The church and little square were crowded with country people from thirty miles round.

But the baroness and Zephirine soon saw that despite his promise Calyste fell back into fatal stupor. On the day the family donned mourning the baroness took her son to a garden bench and questioned him closely. Calyste answered gently and submissively, but his replies proved only the despair of his soul.

“Mother,” he said, “there is no life in me. What I eat does not feed me; the air does not refresh me; the sun feels cold; it seems to you to light that front of the house, but to me it is a blur. If Beatrix were here it would be dazzling. There is but one thing left that keeps its shape to my eyes—this flower,” adding he drew from his breast the withered bunch the marquise had given him at Croisic.

The baroness dared not say more. His answer seemed more indicative of madness than his silence. She saw no hope or light in the darkness.

The baron’s last hours had prevented the rector from bringing Mademoiselle des Touches to Calyste. But that day, while mother and son sat on the bench, Calyste quivered at seeing Felicite through the opposite windows. She reminded him of Beatrix, and his life revived. It was to Camille the poor mother owed the first motion of joy that lightened her mourning.

“Well, Calyste,” said Mademoiselle des Touches, “I want you to go to Paris with me. We will find Beatrix,” she added in a low voice.

The pale, thin face flushed red and a smile brightened him.

“Let us go,” he said.

“We shall save him,” said Mademoiselle des Touches to the mother, who pressed her hands and wept for joy.

A week after the baron’s funeral, Mademoiselle des Touches, the Baronne du Guenic, and Calyste started for Paris, leaving the household in charge of old Zephirine.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Felicite’s tender love was preparing for Calyste a prosperous future. Being allied to the Grandlieu family—the ducal line would end in five daughters for lack of a male heir—she had written to the Duchesse de Grandlieu describing Calyste, his history, and her intentions. She had lately sold her house in the rue du Mont-Blanc for two million five hundred thousand francs. Her agent bought for her a charming new house in the rue de Bourbon for seven hundred thousand francs; one million she intended to devote to recovering the du Guenic estates, and the rest she desired to settle upon Sabine de Grandlieu. Felicite knew the Grandlieus’ plans: the youngest was to marry the Vicomte de Grandlieu (the heir); Clotilde-Frédérique, the second daughter, wished to remain unmarried in memory of Lucien de Rubempré, while not becoming a nun like her eldest sister; two sisters were already married; and Sabine, nearly twenty and the second youngest, was the only available daughter. Felicite resolved that Sabine should cure Calyste of his passion for Béatrix.

During the journey to Paris Mademoiselle des Touches revealed these arrangements to the baroness. The new rue de Bourbon house was being decorated and intended as Sabine and Calyste’s home if the plan succeeded.

The party stayed at the hôtel de Grandlieu, where the baroness was received with the distinction due to her rank as a du Guenic and the daughter of a British peer. Mademoiselle des Touches urged Calyste to see Paris, investigated Béatrix (who had disappeared abroad), and threw him into diversions and amusements. The season for balls was beginning, and the duchess and her daughters did the honors. Calyste found some resemblance between Madame de Rochefide and Sabine, one of the handsomest and most charming girls in Parisian society; this fancied likeness made him attend willingly to Sabine’s coquetries. Sabine liked Calyste, and the winter of 1837 passed so that the young baron—his youth and health restored—listened without repugnance to his mother when she reminded him of the promise to his dying father and proposed marriage with Sabine. He agreed outwardly but kept within himself an indifference known only to the baroness, who trusted it would be conquered by a happy home.

On the day the families gathered in the Grandlieu salon to sign the marriage contract, when the notary Leopold Hannequin began preliminaries, Calyste—clouded—suddenly and curtly refused to accept the benefactions offered by Mademoiselle des Touches. Did he still rely on Felicite’s devotion to recover Béatrix? In the embarrassment of the assembled families, Sabine entered and handed him a letter from Mademoiselle des Touches, to be given on that occasion.

Calyste read:

Camille Maupin to Calyste.

Calyste—before I enter my convent cell I am permitted to cast a last look upon the world I leave for a life of prayer and solitude. That look is for you, who have been my whole world these last months. My voice will reach you at the moment of a ceremony in which I cannot share.

On the day you stand before the altar giving your hand to a young and charming girl who can love you openly, I shall be at another altar in a convent at Nantes betrothed forever to Him who neither fails nor betrays. I do not write to sadden you, but to entreat you not to deny the service I wish to do you. Do not contest my rights so dearly bought.

If love is suffering, I have loved you indeed, my Calyste. But have no remorse; the only happiness I have known I owe to you; my pangs sprang from myself. Make me recompense by causing me an everlasting joy. Let poor Camille, who is no longer what she was, still be something in the material comfort you enjoy. Let me be like a fragrance in your life, unseen and not importunate.

To you, Calyste, I shall owe my eternal happiness; will you not accept a few paltry and fleeting benefits from me? Do not be wanting in generosity. Do you not see this as the last message of a renounced love? The world without you held nothing more for me; you made it the most awful of solitudes; you have brought Camille Maupin, the unbeliever and writer, bound before God.

I am now what I might have been—innocent, a child. I have washed my robes in tears of repentance; I can come before the altar to which my guardian angel, my beloved Calyste, has led me. I love you without self-seeking, as a mother loves her son, as the Church loves her children. I can pray for you and yours without wish except your happiness. If you knew the sublime tranquillity in which I live, now risen above petty interests and doing our duty, you would enter your new life with unfaltering steps and never a look behind. Society cannot exist without the religion of duty; sacrifice your fancy to your duties as head of your race, husband, father. Raise the fallen standard of the old du Guenics; show what a gentleman is in honor and grandeur. Let me play a mother’s part to you; your own mother will not be jealous of this voice from a tomb, these hands uplifted to heaven imploring blessings. Today, more than ever, rank and nobility need fortune. Calyste, accept a part of mine, and make a worthy use of it. It is not a gift but a trust I place in you. I thought more of your children and the old Breton house than of you in offering you my Parisian profits.

“Let us now sign the contract,” said the young baron, returning to the company.

The Abbé Grimont, to whom Camille’s conversion was attributed, soon became vicar-general of the diocese.

The following week, after a ceremony at seven in the morning at Saint-Thomas d’Aquin, Calyste and Sabine left in their pretty travelling-carriage amid tears, embraces, and congratulations. Congratulations came from the witnesses and men; tears from the Duchesse de Grandlieu and Clotilde, who trembled thinking, “She is launched upon the sea of life! Poor Sabine! at the mercy of a man who does not marry entirely of his own free will.”

Marriage is not wholly pleasures; it involves temperamental compatibility, physical sympathies, and character harmonies. Mothers and marriageable daughters know the lottery’s terms and dangers—that is why women weep at a wedding while men smile; men think they risk nothing, women know, or nearly know, what they risk.

In a preceding carriage rode the Baronne du Guenic, to whom the duchess had said, “You are a mother, though you have only had one son; try to take my place to my dear Sabine.” On the bridal carriage sat a chasseur as courier; two waiting-maids and four postilions, decorated with ribbons and bouquets (which the duke bribed them to relinquish) completed the convoy. The duchess bade them farewell, hinting to Calyste that she understood him. Clotilde watched them depart, tearful, as the convoy clattered off toward Brittany.

It is singular that both artisans and great families set out publicly after marriage: the great hide themselves in carriages; the little people parade roads and woods. A moralist might debate which modesty is finer—the private inauguration of the domestic hearth or the public display. The love which begins a marriage is a jewel to be buried in the depths of the soul.

Who can relate a honeymoon? Much of it belongs to the bride. Many women will recognize that this uncertain period forecasts conjugal life. Young women of the faubourg Saint-Germain, like Sabine, are, if intelligent, well trained in manners and bearing; such upbringing, combined with virgin sincerity, made Sabine as interesting as Mademoiselle de Chaulieu. Her letters to her mother during the honeymoon show her mind and temperament.

Guerande, April, 1838.

To Madame la Duchesse de Grandlieu:

Dear Mamma,—You will understand why I did not write during the journey—our wits are like wheels. Here I am in the depths of Brittany at the hôtel du Guenic—a house carved like a sandal-wood box. Despite the family’s affection, I feel a desire to fly to you and confess things only a mother should know.

Calyste married with great sorrow. We all knew that, and you warned me of difficulties; but they are greater than you thought. Ah, my dear mother, what experience we gain in hours! All your counsels seemed fruitless; I love Calyste as if he were not my husband—that is, if I were married to another and traveling with Calyste, I should love Calyste and hate my husband.

Now imagine a man loved so completely, involuntarily, absolutely; my servitude is established despite your good advice. You told me to be grand, dignified, and self-respecting to win esteem and consideration that sanctify a woman. I remember your warnings about the young women who begin marriage with compliance and familiarity that lead to indifference and contempt. “Remember that you are a Grandlieu!” Yes, I recall all that.

But could you have supposed I should begin with the catastrophe you feared? When Calyste and I were alone in the carriage we felt foolish, both bewildered by the first words and looks; at the barrier he began the set speech one makes—“My dear Sabine, I want you happy in your own way; let us be at once what we shall be years hence; think that you have a friend and brother in me, as I shall have a sister and friend in you.” It was said with delicacy, but it did not answer my feelings; I replied that I felt the same sentiments, and we talked of weather and scenery.

At Versailles I asked him to tell me the events that led him to death and to which I owed my marriage. My request caused an argument through three relays—me obstinate, him debating like a king asked to yield. At last, after Verneuil and vows, he related his love for Madame de Rochefide.

“I do not wish to have any secrets between us,” he said.

Poor Calyste—he did not know you and Mademoiselle des Touches had told me the truth. You will not blame me, mother, for reconnoitring the wound you warned me of. Eight hours after Saint-Thomas d’Aquin I found myself in the false position of a young wife hearing from her husband the story of his misplaced love for another. Still, I gained what I sought. He ended his tale with warm protestations of absolute forgetting. He took my hand, kissed it, and kept it long clasped. A declaration followed—not in words but by gestures. Perhaps I owed it to the indignation I felt at the bad taste of a woman foolish enough not to love my glorious Calyste.

They are calling me to play cards—I will finish tomorrow. Adieu.

Your Sabine.

Guerande, May, 1838.

I take up my Odyssey. On the third day we dropped ceremonious formality and thee’d and thou’d like lovers. My mother-in-law, trying to take your place, has been so charming she is almost like you. I think she guessed my heroism and hid her anxiety in visible precaution.

When I saw the towers of Guerande I whispered to your son-in-law, “Have you really forgotten her?” Calyste, now my angel, grew wild with happiness at my words. The desire to put Madame de Rochefide forever from his mind led me perhaps too far. But how could I help it? I love, and I am somewhat Portuguese—I am more like you than my father.

Calyste accepts all from me as an only child thinks everything his right. Between ourselves, I will not give my daughter to an only son; I see tyrants in an only son. We have inverted our parts: I am the devoted half. Devotion has dangers—loss of dignity; but what can I do? You were not here, and I saw a gulf. Had I kept my dignity I might have won only the cold joys of a brotherhood that would drift into indifference. My devotion has made me Calyste’s slave; shall I regret it? We shall see.

For now I love him absolutely with a mother’s folly.

Guerande, May 15th.

To the present, dear mamma, marriage is delightful. I spend all my tenderness on the noblest of men whom a foolish woman disdained for a fiddler—she was a fool, a cold fool. I, in my legitimate love, am charitable; I cure his wounds and lay my heart open to incurable ones. The more I love Calyste the more I fear losing this present happiness.

The whole family and circle at the hôtel de Guenic adore me. They are personages born under high tapestries—antiquated and noble. When alone I will describe Aunt Zéphirine, Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoël, the Chevalier du Halga, and others. Even the two servants, Gasselin and Mariotte (whom I wish to take to Paris), regard me as an angel.

My mother-in-law has installed us in the apartments she and her late husband occupied. She gave us her rooms with touching words: “I spent my married life, a happy woman, in these rooms; may the omen be happy for you.” She has taken Calyste’s room. Saintly soul! She seems intent on investing us with her memories. Brittany, its customs, and its feudal faith have something sacred even in trifles.

All the tenants of the du Guenic estates—bought back by Mademoiselle des Touches—came in holiday dress to pay respects. They rejoiced that Calyste was now really their master; they understand Brittany, the feudal system, and old France. The leases have been proposed by the “gars” themselves; we shall sign them after inspecting estates mortgaged for a century and a half. Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoël told me the “gars” have reckoned rentals with a justice Parisians would hardly believe. We start in three days on horseback. For now my happiness is at its height.

Nantes, June, 1838.

After playing chatelaine—riding through forests, halting at farmhouses, dining on oaken tables with centenary linen, drinking wines to volleys of musketry, attending bagpipe balls, receiving bouquets and acclamations, and sleeping deeply with love’s delightful awakenings—we are at Nantes.

What a day at the old castle! The rector and clergy received us crowned with flowers and blessed us; I wept at the joy. Calyste played his seigneur like a Walter Scott figure; he received tenants’ homage as if in the thirteenth century. The peasants called him “a beautiful seigneur,” and old men likened him to former Guenics. Noble, sublime Brittany! Progress will bring bridges and roads; perhaps the peasants will cease to be as proud as I saw them now.

After signing contracts and leases we came here to kneel with our happiness at the feet of her who gave it to us.

In memory of her, Calyste has quartered his arms with those of Des Touches; he means to take an eagle argent supporter and put the motto “Souviegne-vous” in its beak.

Yesterday we visited the convent of the Visitation ladies with the Abbé Grimont, who told us Felicite was indeed a saint. Mademoiselle des Touches declined to receive Calyste and would only see me. She looked thinner and paler but pleased at our visit.

“Tell Calyste,” she said low, “it is a matter of conscience with me not to see him. I prefer not to buy happiness by months of suffering. The mother of the novices cannot conceive the number and extent of ideas that rush through my mind when she asks, ‘Of what are you thinking?’ Sometimes I see Italy or Paris, but always Calyste is the sun of memory to me.” She explained she had entered the order of Saint-François de Sales because its rule disciplined the intellect rather than mortified the body—she sought austerity toward the mind. “My head was the guilty part,” she said, “it deceived me as to my heart until the fatal age of forty, when for brief moments we are forty times happier than young women and soon fifty times more unhappy. But tell me—are you happy?”

“You see me under all the enchantments of love,” I answered.

“Calyste is as good and simple as he is noble and beautiful,” she said gravely. “I have made you my heiress in more than property; you possess the double ideal I dreamed. I rejoice in what I have done. But make no mistake; do yourself no wrong. You have easily won happiness; you have only to stretch out your hand to take it; but be careful to preserve it. If you had come merely to carry away the counsels my knowledge of your husband gives, the journey would be well repaid. Calyste is moved now by a communicated passion, but you have not inspired it. To make your happiness lasting, try to give him something of his former emotions. In the interests of both, be capricious, be coquettish; you must be. I am not advising odious scheming, but the science of a woman’s life. Between usury and prodigality, child, is economy. Acquire honorably an empire over Calyste. These are the last words on earthly interests I shall ever utter; I have kept them to say as we part. Bind him to you, give him children, let him respect their mother in you—and,” she added in a low trembling voice, “if you can, see that he never again meets Béatrix.”

That name plunged us both into stupor. We exchanged uneasy looks.

“Do you return to Guerande?” she asked.

“Yes,” I said.

“Never go to Les Touches. I did wrong to give him that property.”

“Why?” I asked.

“Child! Les Touches is Bluebeard’s chamber for you. Nothing is so dangerous as to wake a sleeping passion.”

I have given you the substance of our conversation. Mademoiselle des Touches made me talk freely and gave me much to think of; in our delight I had nearly forgotten the serious situation you warned me of.

But, mother, it is impossible for me to follow her counsel. I cannot put on opposition or caprice; it would falsify my love. Calyste will do with me what he pleases. According to your theory, the more I am a woman the more I make myself his toy; for I am, and know it, horribly weak in my happiness; I cannot resist a single glance of my lord. But no—I do not abandon myself; I cling to love as a mother to her infant, fearing some evil.

Note.—When “Béatrix” was first published in 1839, the volume ended with a paragraph saying: “Calyste, rich and married to the most beautiful woman in Paris, retains a sadness in his soul which nothing dissipates—not even the birth of a son at Guerande, in 1839, to the great joy of Zéphirine du Guenic. Béatrix lives still in the depths of his heart, and it is impossible to foresee what disasters might result should he again meet Madame de Rochefide.” In 1842 that concluding paragraph was suppressed and the story continued as above.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Guerande, July, 1838.

To Madame la Duchesse de Grandlieu:

Ah, my dear mamma! After three months I know what jealousy is! My heart completes its experience; I now feel the deepest hatred and the deepest love. I am more than betrayed—I am not loved. How fortunate to have a mother, a heart on which to cry out as I will!

It is enough to say to wives who are still half girls: “Here’s a key rusty with memories among those of your palace; go everywhere, enjoy everything, but keep away from Les Touches!” to make us eager to go there at once, our eyes shining with the curiosity of Eve. What a root of bitterness Mademoiselle des Touches planted in my love! Why did she forbid me Les Touches? What sort of happiness is mine if it depends on an excursion to a paltry house in Brittany? Why should I fear? Is there anything to fear? Add to this the desire that nips all women to know if their power is solid or precarious, and you’ll understand how I said one day, with an unconcerned little air:—

“What sort of place is Les Touches?”

“Les Touches belongs to you,” said my mother-in-law.

“If Calyste had never set foot in Les Touches!” cried my aunt Zephirine, shaking her head.

“He would not be my husband,” I added.

“Then you know what happened there?” said my mother-in-law, slyly.

“It is a place of perdition!” exclaimed Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel. “Mademoiselle des Touches committed many sins there, for which she is now asking pardon.”

“But they saved that noble woman’s soul, and made the fortune of a convent,” cried the Chevalier du Halga. “The Abbé Grimont told me she gave a hundred thousand francs to the nuns of the Visitation.”

“Would you like to go to Les Touches?” asked my mother-in-law. “It is worth seeing.”

“No, no!” I said hastily.

Doesn’t this little scene read like a page from some diabolical drama?

It was repeated until my mother-in-law said: “I understand why you do not go to Les Touches, and I think you are right.”

Oh! you must admit, mamma, an involuntary, unconscious stab like that would have decided you to find if your happiness rested on so frail a foundation. To do Calyste justice, he never proposed to visit that hermitage, now his property. But when we love we are creatures devoid of common-sense, and his silence piqued me; so I said to him one day: “What are you afraid of at Les Touches, that you alone never speak of the place?”

“Let us go there,” he replied.

So there I was caught—like other women who want to be caught, trusting chance to cut the Gordian knot. To Les Touches we went.

It is enchanting, in a profoundly artistic style. I took delight in that place of horror where Mademoiselle des Touches had so earnestly forbidden me to go. Poisonous flowers are charming; Satan sowed them—for the devil has flowers as well as God; we need only look within our souls to see both at work. What delicious acridity in a situation where I played not with fire but with ashes! I studied Calyste; the point was to know if that passion was thoroughly extinct. I watched every wind; I kept an eye on his face as he went from room to room like a child looking for something hidden. Calyste seemed thoughtful; at first I thought I had vanquished the past. I felt strong enough to mention Madame de Rochefide—whom in my heart I called la Rocheperfide. At last we went to see the famous bush where Beatrix was caught when he flung her into the sea that she might never belong to another man.

“She must be light indeed to have stayed there,” I said laughing. Calyste kept silence, so I added, “We’ll respect the dead.”

Still Calyste was silent.

“Have I displeased you?” I asked.

“No; but cease to galvanize that passion,” he answered.

What a speech! Calyste, when he saw me cast down, redoubled his care and tenderness.

August.

I was, alas, at the edge of a precipice, amusing myself, like heroines of melodramas, by gathering flowers. Suddenly a horrible thought rode through my happiness like the horse in the German ballad. I thought I saw Calyste’s love increasing through reminiscences; that he expended on me the stormy emotions I revived by reminding him of the coquetries of that hateful Beatrix—think of it! that cold, unhealthy nature, so persistent yet so flabby, something between a mollusk and a bit of coral, dares to call itself Beatrix, Beatrice!

Already, dearest mother, I am forced to keep one eye open to suspicion, when my heart is all Calyste’s; and isn’t it a great catastrophe when the eye gets the better of the heart, and suspicion at last is justified? It came to pass thus:—

“This place is dear to me,” I said to Calyste one morning, “because I owe my happiness to it; and so I forgive you for taking me sometimes for another woman.”

The loyal Breton blushed, and I threw my arms around his neck. But all the same I have left Les Touches, and never will I go back.

The very strength of hatred which makes me long for Madame de Rochefide’s death—ah, heavens! a natural death, pleurisy, or some accident—makes me understand the power of my love for Calyste. That woman troubles my sleep—I see her in a dream; shall I ever meet her bodily? Ah! the postulant of the Visitation was right—Les Touches is a fatal spot; Calyste there recovered his past emotions, and they are, I see, more powerful than the joys of our love. Ascertain, my dear mamma, if Madame de Rochefide is in Paris, for if she is I shall stay in Brittany. Poor Mademoiselle des Touches might repent of her share in our marriage if she knew to what extent I am taken for our odious rival! This is prostitution! I am not myself; I am ashamed. A frantic desire seizes me sometimes to fly from Guerande and those sands of Croisic.

August 25th.

I am determined to live in the ruins of the old chateau. Calyste, worried by my restlessness, agrees to take me. Either he knows life so little that he guesses nothing, or he does know the cause of my flight, in which case he cannot love me. I tremble with fear lest I find the certainty I seek that, like a child, I put my hands before my eyes not to hear the explosion—

Oh, mother! I am not loved with the love I feel. Calyste is charming to me, that’s true! but what man, unless a monster, would not be amiable and gracious when receiving the flowers of the soul of a young girl of twenty, brought up by you, pure, loving, and beautiful, as many have said I am.

Guenic, September 18.

Has he forgotten her? That’s the solitary thought echoing through my soul like remorse. Ah, dear mamma, have all women to struggle against memories as I do? None but innocent young men should be married to pure young girls. But that’s a deceptive Utopia; better have one’s rival in the past than in the future.

Ah mother, pity me, though at this moment I am happy as a woman who fears to lose her happiness and clings to it—one way of killing it, says that wise Clotilde.

I notice that for the last five months I think only of myself, that is, of Calyste. Tell sister Clotilde her melancholy bits of wisdom often recur to me. She is happy in being faithful to the dead; she fears no rival. A kiss to my dear Athenais, about whom I see Juste is beside himself. From what you told me it is evident he fears you will not give her to him. Cultivate that fear as a precious product. Athenais will be sovereign lady; I who fear I can never win Calyste back shall always be a servant.

A thousand tendernesses, dear mamma. Ah! if my terrors are not delusions, Camille Maupin has sold me her fortune dearly. My affectionate respects to papa.

These letters explain the secret relation between husband and wife. Sabine thought of a love marriage where Calyste saw only a marriage of expediency. The joys of the honeymoon had not entirely conformed to social expectations.

During the couple’s stay in Brittany the restoration and furnishing of the hotel du Guenic were carried on by the architect Grindot, under the superintendence of Clotilde and the Duc and Duchesse de Grandlieu, all arrangements being made for returning to Paris in December 1838. Sabine installed herself in the rue de Bourbon with pleasure—less for playing mistress of a great household than to know what her family would think of her marriage.

Calyste, with easy indifference, let Clotilde and the duchess guide him in society, and they were grateful for his obedience. He obtained the place due to his name, fortune, and alliance. The success of his wife, regarded as one of the most charming women in Paris, the diversions of high society, duties to fulfill, and winter amusements gave a fresh life to the young household by producing excitements and interludes. Sabine, considered happy by her mother and sister, who saw in Calyste’s coolness an effect of his English education, cast aside her gloomy notions; she heard her lot so envied that she drove her terrors into chimeras, until her pregnancy gave guarantees to this neutral union. In October 1839 the young Baronne du Guenic had a son, and committed the mistake of nursing it herself, on the theory, common to many women, that they must be wholly the child’s mother.

Toward the end of the following summer, August 1840, Sabine had nearly reached the end of nursing her first child. Calyste, during two years in Paris, had completely thrown off the innocence that had adorned his first appearance in love. He was now the comrade of the young Duc Georges de Maufrigneuse, lately married like him to an heiress, and of other habitués of his mother-in-law’s salon; he understood the differences between Parisian life and provincial life. Wealth has fatal hours of leisure and idleness which Paris knows how to amuse. Contact with young husbands who deserted home for cigars, whist, clubs, or the turf undermined many domestic virtues. A wife’s maternal solicitude often supports a husband’s dissipations. A wife is proud to see him return after liberty of action.

One evening in October, to escape the crying of the newly weaned child, Calyste—on whose forehead Sabine could not bear a frown—went, urged by her, to the Variétés. The footman had engaged a stall near the avant-scène. During the first interlude Calyste saw in a proscenium box Madame de Rochefide. Beatrix in Paris! The two thoughts flew through Calyste’s heart like arrows. To see her again after nearly three years! How shall we depict the convulsion in the soul of this lover, who had sometimes substituted Beatrix for his wife so plainly that his wife had perceived it? Beatrix was light, life, motion, the Unknown. Sabine was duty, dulness, the expected. One became pleasure; the other, weariness. It was like a thunderbolt.

From a sense of loyalty, Calyste’s first thought was to leave. As he left the orchestra stalls, he saw the proscenium door half-open, and his feet took him there. The young Breton found Beatrix between two distinguished men, Canalis and Raoul Nathan. In three years since Calyste had seen her, Madame de Rochefide had changed; yet the transformation made her more poetic and attractive to Calyste. Until thirty, pretty Parisian women ask nothing of their toilette but clothing; after thirty they look for weapons and embellishments among their chiffons; they pass from nature to art.

Madame de Rochefide had been through the drama of the Deserted Woman. Deserted by Conti, she became an artist in dress, coquetry, artificial flowers. “Why is Conti not here?” Calyste asked Canalis.

Canalis warned him with a finger on his lip.

“I am happy to see you,” said Beatrix demurely. “I said to myself when I recognized you that you at least would not disown me. Ah! my Calyste,” she whispered, “why did you marry—and with such a little fool!”

When a woman whispers to a newcomer and makes him sit beside her, men find an excuse to leave the pair alone.

“Come, Nathan,” said Canalis; “Madame la marquise will allow me to go say a word to d’Arthez.”

The departure gave Calyste time to recover; but he nearly lost strength again as he inhaled the perfume, entrancing though venomous, of Beatrix. Madame de Rochefide, now bony and gaunt, her complexion faded, her eyes hollow, evening amplified those ruins by the cleverest contrivances of the article Paris. She had assumed a virgin air, recalling the maidens of Ossian. Her fair hair draped her elongated face in curls. A scarf of gossamer wound about her throat, partly concealing a cleverly corseted bust. Her figure was a composition.

Her pose—worthy of her pains—presented a mixture of false glitter and fabrics, vivacity and calmness that is the Je ne sais quoi: great cleverness, taste, and composure. Beatrix might be called a decorative scenic effect, manipulated at will. Such an effect, with clever dialogue, turns men’s heads: a woman who can create herself beautiful seems to promise many other resources for love. Deserted women usually love deeply; those who retain love know the art of loving. Though hulled by experience, Beatrix’s nature was instinctively artificial and profited by it.

“It is not a question of loving a man,” she had been saying; “we must tease and harass him if we want to keep him. That’s the secret of women who retain men. The dragons who guard treasures are armed with claws and wings.”

“I shall make a sonnet on that thought,” replied Canalis as Calyste entered.

With a single glance Beatrix divined Calyste’s heart; she saw the marks of the collar she had put on him at Les Touches. Calyste, wounded by a speech about his wife, hesitated between dignity as a husband and a defense of Sabine, and a harsh word toward a heart that still held such memories. The marquise observed his hesitation; she had made that speech to know how far her empire still extended. Seeing his weakness, she came to relieve his embarrassment.

“Well, dear friend, you find me alone,” she said. “You forget me!”

“You!” he replied; “but you are married. That was one of my griefs.”

“Not only—I said to myself—I lose love, but I have lost a friendship I thought was Breton. Alas! we can make ourselves bear everything. Now I suffer less, but I am broken, exhausted! This is the first outpouring of my heart for a long time. Obliged to seem proud before indifferent persons, and arrogant as if I had never fallen, and having lost my dear Félicité, there was no ear into which I could cry, I suffer! But to you I can tell the anguish I endured on seeing you so near me. Yes,” she said to a gesture of Calyste’s, “it is almost fidelity. That is how it is with misery; a look, a visit, a mere nothing is everything to us. Ah! you once loved me—you—as I deserved to be loved.”

She played the pupils of her eyes to double effect. Calyste, speechless, let tears fall. Beatrix caught his hand and pressed it, making him pale.

“Thank you, Calyste, thank you, my poor child; that is how a true friend responds to grief. No, don’t add another word; leave me now; people are looking; it might cause trouble to your wife if someone said we were seen together—innocently enough, before a thousand people! There, you see I am strong; adieu—”

She wiped her eyes, then laughed to remove the melancholy impression.

“But,” said Calyste, “where can I go to see you?”

“I am hidden in the rue de Chartres opposite the Parc Monceau, in a little house suitable to my means; I cram my head with literature—but only for myself to distract thoughts. Now go, leave me; what will the world say! Adieu—oh Calyste, my friend, if you stay another minute I shall burst into tears!”

Calyste withdrew after holding out his hand and feeling for the second time that strange double pressure—full of seductive tingling.

“Sabine never knew how to stir my soul in that way,” he thought in the corridor.

For the rest of the evening Beatrix did not look at Calyste directly, but sidelong glances tore his soul.

When the baron du Guenic reached home the splendor of his apartments made him think of the mediocrity Beatrix had spoken of, and he hated his wealth because it could not belong to that fallen angel. Hearing Sabine had long been in bed, he rejoiced in being free to live over his emotions. He cursed the power of divination love had bestowed upon Sabine. When adored, a wife reads on his face as in a book; she learns every quiver and asks if the cause is herself. Calyste knew he was the object of such naive, jealous worship that he doubted his power to compose a face that would not betray the change within him.

“How shall I manage tomorrow?” he said to himself, dreading the inspection Sabine would make. She would ask, “Do you still love me?” or, “I don’t weary you, do I?” Charming interrogations hide anxieties, feigned or real.

To the surface of noble hearts the mud and slime thrown up by hurricanes must come. So on the morrow Calyste, who loved his child, quivered with joy on learning Sabine feared the croup and watched the baby. The baron made a pretext of business and went out, escaping like a prisoner and happy to go to a café where he had liked to breakfast as a bachelor.

What is there in love? Does Nature rebel against the social yoke? Does she need the dash of an impetuous torrent rather than a tranquil stream between the church and the legal ceremony? It would be difficult to find a young man more sacredly brought up than Calyste and yet he bounded toward a woman unworthy of him when fate had given him a young creature whose beauty was aristocratic, keen mind, piety, and loving attachment. Perhaps the noblest men retain some clay; the slough still pleases them. Madame de Rochefide, amid poetic pretensions and despite her fall, belonged to the highest nobility; she had an ethereal nature and hid the courtesan beneath an aristocratic exterior. That does not fully account for Calyste’s passion.

Perhaps we ought to look for its cause in a vanity buried in the soul. There are noble men, handsome, rich, distinguished, who tire without knowing of marriage with a nature like their own; beings whose nobleness is unsurprised by nobleness in others; they seek in inferior or fallen natures the seal of their superiority. Calyste found nothing to protect in Sabine—she was irreproachable; the stagnant powers in his heart were now to vibrate for Beatrix. If great men have played the Saviour’s part toward the woman taken in adultery, why should ordinary men be wiser?

Calyste lived on one sentence—“I shall see her again!”—and at two o’clock set out to the rue de Chartres. He recognized the house at once. At the foot of the stairs the old footman asked his name; Calyste waited, thinking he ought to leave Beatrix freedom to receive him or not; he looked into the garden with walls furrowed by rain.

Madame de Rochefide, like many great ladies who break their chain, had left her fortune to her husband when she fled; she could not beg from her tyrant. Conti and Mademoiselle des Touches had spared Beatrix petty worries, and her mother often sent money. Finding herself on her own, she had gone to Monceau and taken a little house with a charming garden, rent eighteen hundred francs. Still served by an old footman, a maid, and a cook from Alençon faithful through vicissitudes, her penury was opulence to many bourgeoises.

Calyste climbed stairs with flowering landings. The footman opened a double red-velvet door. Silk and velvet furnished the rooms. On a mantel he saw two old celadons and a silver cup attributed to Benvenuto Cellini from Italy. Furniture and consoles testified to former opulence. On a table Calyste saw jewelled knick-knacks and a book with a dagger used as a paper-cutter—symbol of criticism. On the walls hung ten watercolors representing bedrooms where Beatrix had stayed, the measure of her impertinence.

A silk rustle announced Beatrix in a studied toilette that told a roué her coming was awaited. The gown revealed a white bosom, sleeves of tulle trimmed with lace; the hair escaped from a cap of lace and flowers.

“Already!” she said smiling. “A lover could not have shown more eagerness. You must have secrets to tell me, have you not?”

She posed on a sofa, inviting him to sit. By chance—or choice—Beatrix wore the perfume she used at Les Touches. The scent, the dress, the glance in the semi-darkness turned Calyste’s brain. The luckless man was again impelled to violence that had once almost cost Beatrix her life; but now the marquise was on a sofa; she rose to ring the bell, laying a finger on his lips. Calyste controlled himself when he saw Beatrix had no inimical intent.

“Antoine, I am not at home—for everyone,” she said. “Put some wood on the fire. I treat you as a friend,” she continued, “therefore do not treat me as a mistress. I have two remarks. First, I should not deny myself foolishly to any man I really loved; secondly, I am determined to belong to no other man on earth. I believed, Calyste, I was loved by a species of Rizzio, a man absolutely free, and see to what that fatal confidence led me. As for you, you are under the yoke of the most sacred of duties; you have a young, amiable, delightful wife; you are a father. We should be two fools—”

“My dear Beatrix, all these reasons vanish before a single word—I have never loved but you on earth, and I was married against my will.”

“Ah! a trick played upon us by Mademoiselle des Touches,” she said, smiling.

Three hours passed as Madame de Rochefide spoke to Calyste about conjugal faith, pointing out the horrible alternative of renouncing Sabine. She affected to regard the sacrifice of Sabine as small; she knew her so well!

“My dear child,” she said, “that’s a woman who fulfils the promises of girlhood. She is a Grandlieu, to be sure, but she’s as brown as her mother the Portuguese, not to say yellow, and as dry and stiff as her father. To tell the truth, your wife will never go wrong; she’s a big boy who can take care of herself. Poor Calyste! is that the sort of woman you needed? She has fine eyes, but such eyes are common in Italy and Spain and Portugal. Can any woman be tender with bones like hers? Eve was fair; brown women descend from Adam; blondes come from God.”

About six o’clock Calyste, driven to desperation, took his hat.

“Yes, go, my poor friend,” she said; “don’t give her the annoyance of dining without you.”

Calyste stayed. At his age it was easy to snare him on his worst side.

“What! you dare to dine with me?” said Beatrix, feigning surprise. “My poor food does not alarm you? Have you enough independence to crown me with joy by this proof of affection?”

“Let me write a note to Sabine; otherwise she will wait dinner for me till nine.”

“Here,” said Beatrix, “this is the table at which I write.”

She lighted candles and took one to the table to look over what he wrote.

“My dear Sabine—”

“‘My dear’?—can you really say that your wife is still dear to you?” she asked, looking at him with a cold eye that froze the marrow. “Go—you had better go and dine with her.”

“I dine at a restaurant with some friends.”

“A lie. Oh, fy! you are not worthy to be loved either by her or me. Men are cowards in their treatment of women. Go, monsieur, go and dine with your dear Sabine.”

Calyste flung back in his arm-chair and became pale as death. Bretons possess courage that makes them obstinate even under difficulties. Presently he sat up, put his elbow on the table, his chin in his hand, and looked at the implacable Beatrix with a flashing eye. He was so superb that any woman might have fallen; but Beatrix, born on the borders of Normandy and Brittany, belonged to a race that had the ferocity of the Frank and the spitefulness of the Norman; she wanted a terrible notoriety as vengeance, and yielded to no weakness.

“Dictate what I ought to write,” said the luckless man. “But, in that case—”

“Well, yes!” she said, “you shall love me then as you loved me at Guerande. Write: I dine out; do not expect me.”

“What next?” said Calyste.

“Nothing; sign it. Good,” she said, darting on the note with restrained joy. “I will send it by a messenger.”

“And now,” cried Calyste, rising like a happy man.

“Ah! I have kept my freedom,” she said, turning to the fireplace, where she rang the bell. “Here, Antoine,” she said, “send this note to its address. Monsieur dines here.”

XIX. THE FIRST LIE OF A PIOUS DUCHESS

Calyste returned about two in the morning. After waiting till half-past twelve, Sabine had gone to bed overwhelmed with fatigue. She slept, though keenly distressed by the laconic wording of his note. Still, she explained it. A woman’s true love invariably begins by explaining things to the man’s advantage. Calyste had been pressed for time, she said.

The next morning the child was better; Sabine, smiling, came with little Calyste to present him to his father before breakfast with the pretty fooleries and senseless words gay young mothers use. The scene gave Calyste the chance to keep countenance. He was charming, thinking in his heart he was a monster, and he played like a child with Monsieur le chevalier; he overdid it; but Sabine had not reached the stage at which a woman recognizes such distinctions.

At breakfast she asked: “What did you do yesterday?”

“Portenduere kept me to dinner,” he replied, “and after we went to the club to play whist.”

“That’s a foolish life, my Calyste. Young noblemen should busy themselves about recovering ground lost by their fathers. It isn’t by smoking, playing whist, idling, and saying insolent things of parvenus that the nobility will exist. Instead of being a party, you will soon be a mere opinion, as de Marsay said. Ah! if you only knew how my ideas have enlarged since I have nursed and cradled your child! I’d like to see that grand old name of Guenic become once more historical!” Then, plunging her eyes into Calyste’s, she added: “Admit that the first note you ever wrote me was rather stiff.”

“I did not think of sending you word till I got to the club.”

“But you wrote on a woman’s note-paper; it had a perfume of feminine elegance.”

“Those club directors are such dandies!”

The Vicomte de Portenduere and his wife had become intimate with the du Guenics; the two young women, Ursula and Sabine, had been won to friendship by the exchange of counsels about their first infants.

While Calyste, novice in falsehood, thought, “I must warn Savinien,” Sabine thought, “I am sure that paper bore a coronet.” This flashed through her mind; she scolded herself but resolved to find the paper, which she had flung into her letter-box.

After breakfast Calyste went out saying he would return soon. He jumped into a small carriage and drove in minutes to the vicomte’s to beg him, with rights of return, to fib if Sabine questioned the vicomtesse. Thence he rushed to rue de Chartres to know how Beatrix had passed the night. He found her fresh from her bath, embellished, breakfasting with a good appetite. He admired the grace with which she ate, and the beauty of the gold service a monomaniac lord had given her.

Calyste listened entranced to her witty speeches until she wept when he rose to leave. He thought he had been there half an hour, but it was past three when he reached home. His English horse was so bathed in sweat it looked as if driven through the sea. By chance Sabine was at a window looking on the courtyard, impatient at his lateness; the condition of the horse surprised her.

“Where can he have come from?”

That question, whispered by the power that forebodes, showed the unseen and created belief in mental beings.

“Where do you come from, dear angel?” Sabine said to Calyste on the landing. “Abd-el-Kader is nearly foundered. You told me you’d be gone but a moment, and I have been waiting these three hours.”

“Well, well,” thought Calyste, making progress in dissimulation, “I must get out of it by a present.” He took her round the waist with more cajolery than usual. “Dear little mother, they are finishing a dressing-table at which true artists have worked, and my mother and aunt Zephirine contributed.”

Sabine clasped him and held him, faint with happiness at dispersing her dark doubt. It was one of those transports no love can prodigally spend. Then, as if bitten by a viper, she left him, threw herself on a sofa and fainted, the reaction of a chill to her glowing heart nearly killing her. As she had held Calyste, she had smelled the perfume of that note-paper! Another woman’s head had lain there; she had kissed where the rival’s kisses were still warm.

“What is the matter?” asked Calyste, who brought her back by smelling salts.

“Fetch the doctor and my nurse! Yes, my milk has turned; they won’t come unless you fetch them—go!”

Calyste rushed out. At the closing of the porte-cochere Sabine sprang up like a frightened doe, walked about the salon crying, “My God! my God! my God!”

Those words took the place of thought. The crisis she had feared took place. Her hairs felt like red-hot needles; her blood seemed to mingle with her nerves. She was blind for moments, and cried, “I am dying!”

Her maid ran in. Laid upon her bed and recovered, Sabine first sent the maid to Madame de Portenduere. She found her ideas whirling.

She rang for the footman and, mastered by a mad desire for certainty, wrote:

To Madame la Baronne du Guenic:

Dear Mamma,—When you come to Paris, as you allow us to hope, I shall thank you in person for the beautiful present by which you and my aunt Zephirine and Calyste wish to reward me for doing my duty. I was already repaid by my happiness. I can never express the pleasure you have given me in that beautiful dressing-table, but when you are with me I shall try to do so. Believe me, when I array myself before that treasure I shall think, like the Roman matron, that my noblest jewel is our little angel, etc.

She directed the letter to Guerande and gave it to the footman to post.

When the Vicomtesse de Portenduere came, the chill of reaction had succeeded the first paroxysm. “Ursula, I think I am going to die,” she said.

“What is the matter, dear?”

“Where did Savinien and Calyste go after they dined with you yesterday?”

“Savinien and I dined alone and went to the Opera without Calyste,” Ursula said, surprised.

“Ursula, dearest, in the name of your love for Savinien, keep silence about what I will tell you. You alone shall know why I die—I am betrayed! at the end of three years, at twenty-two!”

Her teeth chattered, her eyes dull, her face the greenish tinge of an old Venetian mirror.

“You! so beautiful! For whom?”

“I don’t know yet. But Calyste has told me two lies. Do not pity me; do not seem incensed; pretend ignorance and perhaps you can find who she is through Savinien. Oh! that letter of yesterday!”

Trembling, she sprang to a piece of furniture and took the letter. “See,” she said, lying down, “the coronet of a marquise! Find if Madame de Rochefide has returned to Paris. Am I to have a heart in which to weep? Oh, dearest—to see one’s beliefs, poesy, idol, virtue, happiness, all in pieces! No God in the sky! no love on earth! no life in my heart! I scarcely feel the horrible sufferings in my body. Happily, the baby is weaned; my milk would have poisoned him.”

Tears flowed.

Pretty Madame de Portenduere, holding the fatal letter, was at first stupefied, shocked by this agony, in spite of Sabine’s incoherent attempts to relate facts. Suddenly Ursula was illuminated by an idea only sincere friends have.

“I must save her!” she thought. “Trust me, Sabine,” she cried. “Wait; I will find out the truth.”

“Ah! in my grave I’ll love you,” exclaimed Sabine.

Ursula went to the Duchesse de Grandlieu, pledged secrecy, and explained the situation.

“Madame,” she said, “in order to avoid some fatal illness—we had better confide the truth to the doctor, and invent a tale to clear Calyste and make him seem innocent for the time being.”

“My dear child,” said the duchess, chilled, “friendship has given you the experience of an older woman. I know how Sabine loves her husband; you are right—she might go mad.”

“Or lose her beauty, which would be worse,” said the viscountess.

“Let us go to her!” cried the duchess.

They arrived before the accoucheur, Dommanget. “Ursula has told me everything,” said the duchess to her daughter, “and you are mistaken. In the first place, Madame de Rochefide is not in Paris. As for your husband, he lost a great deal of money at cards, so he does not even know how to pay for your dressing-table.”

“But that?” said Sabine, holding the fatal letter.

“That!” said the duchess, laughing; “why, that is written on Jockey Club paper; everybody writes on coroneted paper now; even our stewards will soon be titled.”

The prudent mother threw the unlucky paper into the fire.

When Calyste and Dommanget arrived, the duchess, who had arranged matters, was informed. She left Sabine to Madame de Portenduere and stopped Dommanget and Calyste in the salon.

“Sabine’s life is at stake, monsieur,” she said to Calyste; “you have betrayed her for Madame de Rochefide.”

Calyste blushed, detected in a fault.

“And,” continued the duchess, “as you do not know how to deceive, you have behaved so clumsily that Sabine has guessed the truth. But I have for the present repaired your blunder. You do not wish my daughter’s death, I am sure. Monsieur Dommanget, this will put you on the track of her real illness and its cause. As for you, Calyste, an old woman like me understands your error though she does not pardon it. Such pardons come only by a lifetime of after happiness. If you wish me to esteem you, you must save my daughter; next, you must forget Madame de Rochefide; she is only worth having once. Learn to lie; have the courage of a criminal and his impudence. I have just told a lie myself, and I shall do penance for that mortal sin.”

She told the two men the lies she had invented. The physician at the bedside studied the means of repair and ordered measures requiring rapid execution. Calyste sat at the foot of the bed striving to put tenderness into his glance.

“So it was play that put those black circles round your eyes?” Sabine said feebly.

The words made the doctor, mother, and viscountess tremble. Calyste turned red as a cherry.

“That’s what comes of nursing a child,” said Dommanget roughly but cleverly. “Husbands are lonely when separated from their wives, and they go to the club and play. But you needn’t worry over the thirty thousand francs Monsieur le baron lost last night—”

“Thirty thousand francs!” cried Ursula.

“Yes,” replied Dommanget. “They told me this morning at the house of the young Duchesse Berthe de Maufrigneuse that Monsieur de Trailles won that money from you,” he added, turning to Calyste. “Why do you play with such men? Frankly, monsieur le baron, I can well believe you are ashamed.”

Seeing his mother-in-law, a pious duchess, the viscountess, and the accoucheur all lying like dealers in bric-a-brac, the kind Calyste understood the danger, and two heavy tears rolled from his eyes and completely deceived Sabine.

“Monsieur,” she said, sitting up and looking angrily at Dommanget, “Monsieur du Guenic can lose thirty, fifty, a hundred thousand francs if it pleases him, without any one having a right to think it wrong. It is far better Monsieur de Trailles should win his money than that we should win Monsieur de Trailles’.”

Calyste rose, took his wife round the neck, kissed her on both cheeks and whispered:—

“Sabine, you are an angel!”

Two days later the young wife was thought out of danger, and the next day Calyste was at Madame de Rochefide’s making merit of his infamy.

“Beatrix,” he said, “you owe me happiness. I have sacrificed my poor little wife to you; she discovered all. That fatal paper bore your name and coronet, which I never noticed—I saw but you! Fortunately the ‘B’ was by chance effaced. But the perfume you left upon me and the lies I involved myself in have betrayed my happiness. Sabine nearly died; her milk went to her head; erysipelas set in, and she may bear marks for the rest of her days.”

As Beatrix listened her face was due North, icy enough to freeze the Seine.

“So much the better,” she said; “perhaps it will whiten her for you.”

Beatrix, now hard as bone, sharp as her voice, continued a series of atrocious sarcasms. There is no greater blunder than for a man to talk of his virtuous wife to his mistress, unless to talk of his mistress to his wife. But Calyste had not received that Parisian education—the politeness of the passions. He knew neither how to lie to his wife nor how to tell his mistress the truth—two apprenticeships necessary to manage women. He was therefore forced to employ all passion’s power to obtain from Beatrix a pardon she made him solicit for two hours; a pardon refused by an injured angel who raised her eyes to the ceiling to avoid seeing the guilty man, and who mustered reasons sacred to marquises in a voice quivering with tears furtively wiped with lace.

“To speak to me of your wife the very day after my fall!” she cried. “Why did you not tell me she is a pearl of virtue? I know she thinks you handsome; pure depravity! I, I love your soul! let me tell you, my friend, you are ugly compared to many shepherds on the Campagna,” etc.

Such speeches may surprise, but they were part of a system meditated by Beatrix in this her third incarnation—for at each passion a woman becomes another being and advances into profligacy, the result of such adventures. The Marquise de Rochefide had sat in judgment on herself before the mirror. Clever women are never deceived about themselves; they count wrinkles, see crow’s-feet, and know themselves. Therefore to struggle successfully against a splendid young woman, Beatrix used the knowledge and science of courtesans. Without acknowledging her baseness, led by a Turkish passion for Calyste’s beauty, she resolved to make him think himself unpleasant, ugly, ill-made, and to behave as if she hated him. No system is more fruitful with conquering men. To such natures the presence of repugnance to be vanquished renews the triumph of the first day. It is flattery in disguise. Beatrix added to contempt a constant comparison of her poetic, comfortable home with the hotel du Guenic. Deserted wives abandon their surroundings; she counted on this and began an underhand attack on the faubourg Saint-Germain’s luxury, calling it stupid.

The scene of reconciliation, where Beatrix made Calyste swear hatred to his wife—who she said played comedy—took place in a bower where she played off her graces amid ravishing flowers and rare plants. The science of nothings she carried to excess. Fallen by Conti’s desertion, Beatrix was determined to have the fame unprincipled conduct gives. The misfortune of the poor young wife, a rich and beautiful Grandlieu, should be her pedestal.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
When a woman returns to ordinary life after nursing her first child she reappears in the world embellished and charming. This phase of maternity, while it rejuvenates older women, gives young women a splendor of freshness, a brisk activity, a brio of mere existence. In trying to return to the charming habits of the honeymoon, Sabine discovered that her husband was not the former Calyste. But Sabine, unhappy, observed him instead of resting in her happiness. She sought for the fatal perfume, and smelt it. This time she no longer confided in her friend, nor in the mother who had so charitably deceived her. She wanted certainty, and Certainty made no long tarrying. Certainty is never wanting, it is like the sun; and presently shades are asked for to keep it out. It is, in matters of the heart, a repetition of the fable of the woodman calling upon Death—we soon ask Certainty to leave us blind.

One morning, about two weeks after the first crisis, Sabine received this terrible letter:

Guerande.

To Madame la Baronne du Guenic:

My dear Daughter,—Your aunt Zephirine and I are lost in conjectures about the dressing-table of which you tell us in your letter. I have written to Calyste about it, and I beg you to excuse our ignorance. You can never doubt our hearts, I am sure. We are piling up riches for you here. Thanks to the advice of Mademoiselle de Pen-Hoel on the management of your property, you will find yourself within a few years in possession of a considerable capital without losing any of your income.

Your letter, dear child as dearly loved as if I had borne you in my bosom and fed you with my milk, surprised me by its brevity, and above all by your silence about my dearest little Calyste. You told me nothing of the great Calyste either, but then, I know that he is happy, etc.

Sabine wrote across this letter these words, “Noble Brittany does not always lie.” She then laid the paper on Calyste’s desk.

Calyste found the letter and read it. Seeing Sabine’s sentence and recognizing her handwriting he flung the letter into the fire, determined to pretend that he had never received it. Sabine spent a week in an agony known only to angelic or solitary souls never touched by the bad angel. Calyste’s silence terrified her.

“I, who ought to be all gentleness, all pleasure to him, I have displeased him, wounded him! My virtue has made itself hateful. I have no doubt humiliated my idol,” she said to herself. These thoughts ploughed furrows in her heart. She wanted to ask pardon for her fault, but Certainty let loose upon her other proofs. Grown bold and insolent, Beatrix wrote to Calyste at his own home; Madame du Guenic received the letter, gave it to her husband unopened, and said to him, in a changed voice: “My friend, that letter is from the Jockey Club; I recognize both the paper and the perfume.”

Calyste colored, and put the letter into his pocket.

“Why don’t you read it?”

“I know what it is about.”

The young wife sat down. No longer did fever burn her; she wept no more; but a madness that in weak beings leads to crimes—even arsenic—possessed her. At this moment little Calyste was brought in, and she took him in her arms to dance him. The child, just awakened, sought the breast beneath the gown.

“He remembers,—he, at any rate,” she said in a low voice.

Calyste went to his own room to read his letter. When he left, the poor young woman burst into tears, weeping as women do when alone.

Pain, like pleasure, has its initiation. The first crisis, like Sabine's, does not recur; it is the first wedge in the heart's torture; later shocks are expected, the nerves primed and forces already spent. So Sabine, sure of betrayal, spent three hours with her son beside the fire, surprising herself, when Gasselin, acting as footman, came to say:

“Madame is served.”

“Let monsieur know.”

“Monsieur does not dine at home, Madame la baronne.”

Who knows the torture for a twenty-three-year-old finding herself alone in the great dining-room of an old mansion, served by silent servants, under circumstances like these?

“Order the carriage,” she said suddenly; “I shall go to the Opera.”

She dressed superbly to show herself smiling. Amid remorse for the postscript she had added to Madame de Rochefide’s letter, she resolved to conquer, to win back Calyste by loving kindness, by the virtues of a wife, by the gentleness of the paschal lamb. She wished also to deceive all Paris. She loved—loved as courtesans and as angels love, with pride and humility. But the opera chanced to be Otello. When Rubini sang Il mio cor si divide, she rushed away. Music is sometimes mightier than actor or poet. Savinien de Portenduere accompanied Sabine to the peristyle and put her in the carriage without understanding this sudden flight.

Madame du Guenic now entered a phase of suffering peculiar to the aristocracy. When you see on the arms of envious, miserable women golden serpents with diamond heads, necklaces clasped about their necks, remember those vipers sting and those bonds burn the flesh. Luxury is dearly bought. In situations like Sabine’s, women curse the pleasures of wealth; salon gilding is indifferent, silk divans seem coarse, exotic flowers are nettles, perfumes poison, choicest cookery scrapes the throat like barley-bread, and life becomes as bitter as the Dead Sea.

Two or three examples may show this reaction of luxury upon happiness, so that all who have endured it may behold their own experience.

Fully aware now of this terrible rivalry, Sabine watched her husband when he left the house to divine the future of his day. With what restrained fury does a woman fling herself upon the red-hot spikes of that savage martyrdom! What delirious joy if she could think he did not go to the rue de Chartres! Calyste returned, and then the study of his forehead, his hair, his eyes, his countenance, his demeanor gave a horrible interest to mere nothings, to observations pursued even to matters of toilet, in which a woman loses her self-respect and dignity. These fatal investigations, concealed in the depths of her heart, rot the delicate roots from which should spring the azure flowers of sacred confidence, the golden petals of the One only love, with all the perfumes of memory.

One day Calyste looked about him discontentedly; he had stayed at home! Sabine made herself caressing and humble, gay and sparkling.

“You are vexed with me, Calyste; am I not a good wife? What is there here that displeases you?” she asked.

“These rooms are so cold and bare,” he replied; “you don’t understand arranging things.”

“Tell me what is wanting.”

“Flowers.”

“Ah!” she thought to herself, “Madame de Rochefide likes flowers.”

Two days later, the rooms of the hotel du Guenic had assumed another aspect. No one in Paris could flatter himself to have more exquisite flowers than those that now adorned them.

Some time later Calyste, one evening after dinner, complained of the cold. He twisted about in his chair, declaring there was a draught, and seemed to be looking for something. Sabine could not at first imagine what this new fancy signified, she, whose house possessed a calorifere which heated the staircases, antechambers, and passages. At last, after three days’ reflection, she concluded that her rival probably sat surrounded by a screen to obtain the half-lights favorable to faded faces; so Sabine had a screen, but hers was of glass and of Israelitish splendor.

“From what quarter will the next storm come?” she said to herself.

These indirect comparisons with his mistress were not yet at an end. When Calyste dined at home he ate his dinner in a way to drive Sabine frantic; he would motion to the servants to take away his plates after pecking at two or three mouthfuls.

“Wasn’t it good?” Sabine would ask, in despair at seeing all the pains she had taken in conference with her cook thrown away.

“I don’t say that, my angel,” replied Calyste, without anger; “I am not hungry, that is all.”

A woman consumed by a legitimate passion, who struggles thus, falls at last into a fury of desire to get the better of her rival, and often goes too far, even in the most secret regions of married life. So cruel, burning, and incessant a combat in the obvious and, as we may call them, exterior matters of a household must needs become more intense and desperate in the things of the heart. Sabine studied her attitudes, her toilets; she took heed about herself in all the infinitely little trifles of love.

The cooking trouble lasted nearly a month. Sabine, with Mariotte and Gasselin, hatched little schemes to learn Madame de Rochefide’s dishes. Gasselin posed as the groom, consorted with her cook, and Sabine soon gave Calyste the same fare, only better; still he found fault.

“What is wanting now?” she said.

“Oh, nothing,” he answered, looking round the table for something he did not find.

“Ah!” exclaimed Sabine, as she woke the next morning, “Calyste wanted some of those Indian sauces they serve in England in cruets. Madame de Rochefide accustoms him to all sorts of condiments.”

She bought the English cruets and the spiced sauces; but it soon became impossible for her to discover all the preparations her rival invented.

This period lasted months; not surprising given the attraction of such struggle. It is life, and that is preferable, with its wounds and its anguish, to the gloomy darkness of disgust, to the poison of contempt, to the void of abdication, to that death of the heart which is called indifference. But all Sabine’s courage abandoned her one evening when she appeared in a toilet such as women are inspired to wear in the hope of eclipsing a rival, and about which Calyste said, laughing:

“In spite of all you can do, Sabine, you’ll never be anything but a handsome Andalusian.”

“Alas!” she said, dropping on a sofa, “I may never make myself a blonde, but I know if this continues I shall soon be thirty-five years old.”

She refused to go to the Opera as she intended, and chose to stay at home the whole evening. Once alone she pulled the flowers from her hair and stamped upon them; she tore off the gown and scarf and trampled them underfoot, like a goat in the tangle of its tether, which struggles till death comes. Then she went to bed.

XXI. THE WICKEDNESS OF A GOOD WOMAN

Playing for these terrible stakes Sabine grew thin; grief consumed her; but she never for a moment forsook the role she had imposed upon herself. Sustained by a sort of fever, her lips suppressed the bitter words that pain suggested; she repressed the flashing of her glorious dark eyes, and made them soft even to humility. But her failing health soon became noticeable. The duchess, an excellent mother, though her piety was growing more Portuguese, recognized a moral cause in the physical weakness in which Sabine took refuge. She knew the exact state of the relation between Beatrix and Calyste; and she took great pains to draw her daughter to her own house, partly to soothe the wounds of her heart, but more especially to drag her away from the scene of her martyrdom. Sabine, however, maintained the deepest silence for a long time about her sorrows, fearing lest some one might meddle between herself and Calyste. She declared herself happy! At the height of her misery she recovered her pride, and all her virtues.

But at last, after some months during which her sister Clotilde and her mother had caressed and petted her, she acknowledged her grief, confided her sorrows, cursed life, and declared that she saw death coming with delirious joy. She begged Clotilde, who was resolved to remain unmarried, to be a mother to her little Calyste, the finest child that any royal race could desire for heir presumptive.

One evening, as she sat with her young sister Athenais (whose marriage to the Vicomte de Grandlieu was to take place at the end of Lent), and with Clotilde and the duchess, Sabine gave utterance to the supreme cries of her heart’s anguish, excited by the pangs of a last humiliation.

“Athenais,” she said, when the Vicomte Juste de Grandlieu departed at eleven o’clock, “you are going to marry; let my example be a warning to you. Consider it a crime to display your best qualities; resist the pleasure of adorning yourself to please Juste. Be calm, dignified, cold; measure the happiness you give by that which you receive. This is shameful, but it is necessary. Look at me. I perish through my best qualities. All I knew—my virtues—were rocks on which my happiness is wrecked. I have ceased to please because I am not thirty-six years old. In the eyes of some men youth is thought an inferiority. There is nothing to imagine on an innocent face. I laugh frankly, and that is wrong; to captivate I ought to play off the melancholy half-smile of the fallen angel, who wants to hide her yellowing teeth. A fresh complexion is monotonous; some men prefer their doll’s wax made of rouge and spermaceti and cold cream. I am straightforward; but duplicity is more pleasing. I am loyally passionate, as an honest woman may be, but I ought to be manoeuvring, tricky, hypocritical, and simulate a coldness I have not,—like any provincial actress. I am intoxicated with the happiness of having married one of the most charming men in France; I tell him, naively, how distinguished he is, how graceful his movements are, how handsome I think him; but to please him I ought to turn away my head with pretended horror, to love nothing with real love, and tell him his distinction is mere sickliness. I have the misfortune to admire all beautiful things without setting myself up for a wit by caustic and envious criticism of whatever shines from poesy and beauty. I don’t seek to make Canalis and Nathan say of me in verse and prose that my intellect is superior. I’m only a poor little artless child; I care only for Calyste. Ah! if I had scoured the world like her, if I had said as she has said, ‘I love,’ in every language of Europe, I should be consoled, I should be pitied, I should be adored for serving the regal Macedonian with cosmopolitan love! We are thanked for our tenderness if we set it in relief against our vice. And I, a noble woman, must teach myself impurity and all the tricks of prostitutes! And Calyste is the dupe of such grimaces! Oh, mother! oh, my dear Clotilde! I feel that I have got my death-blow. My pride is only a sham buckler; I am without defence against my misery; I love my husband madly, and yet to bring him back to me I must borrow the wisdom of indifference.”

“Silly girl,” whispered Clotilde, “let him think you will avenge yourself—”

“I wish to die irreproachable and without the mere semblance of doing wrong,” replied Sabine. “A woman’s vengeance should be worthy of her love.”

“My child,” said the duchess to her daughter, “a mother must of course see life more coolly than you can see it. Love is not the end, but the means, of the Family. Do not imitate that poor Baronne de Macumer. Excessive passion is unfruitful and deadly. And remember, God sends us afflictions with knowledge of our needs. Now that Athenais’ marriage is arranged, I can give all my thoughts to you. In fact, I have already talked of this delicate crisis in your life with your father and the Duc de Chaulieu, and also with d’Ajuda; we shall certainly find means to bring Calyste back to you.”

“There is always one resource with the Marquise de Rochefide,” remarked Clotilde, smiling, to her sister; “she never keeps her adorers long.”

“D’Ajuda, my darling,” continued the duchess, “was Monsieur de Rochefide’s brother-in-law. If our dear confessor approves of certain little manoeuvres to which we must have recourse to carry out a plan which I have proposed to your father, I can guarantee to you the recovery of Calyste. My conscience is repugnant to the use of such means, and I must first submit them to the judgment of the Abbe Brossette. We shall not wait, my child, till you are in extremis before coming to your relief. Keep a good heart! Your grief to-night is so bitter that my secret escapes me; but it is impossible for me not to give you a little hope.”

“Will it make Calyste unhappy?” asked Sabine, looking anxiously at the duchess.

“Oh, heavens! shall I ever be as silly as that!” cried Athenais, naively.

“Ah, little girl, you know nothing of the precipices down which our virtue flings us when led by love,” replied Sabine, making a sort of moral revelation, so distraught was she by her woe.

The speech was uttered with such incisive bitterness that the duchess, enlightened by the tone and look of her daughter, felt certain there was some hidden trouble.

“My dears, it is midnight; come, go to bed,” she said to Clotilde and Athenais, whose eyes were shining.

“In spite of my thirty-five years I appear to be de trop,” said Clotilde, laughing. While Athenais kissed her mother, Clotilde leaned over Sabine and said in her ear: “You will tell what it is? I’ll dine with you to-morrow. If my mother’s conscience won’t let her act, I—I myself will get Calyste out of the hands of the infidels.”

“Well, Sabine,” said the duchess, taking her daughter into her bedroom, “tell me, what new trouble is there, my child?”

“Mamma, I am lost!”

“But how?”

“I wanted to get the better of that horrible woman—I conquered for a time—I am pregnant again—and Calyste loves her so that I foresee a total abandonment. When she hears of it she will be furious. Ah! I suffer such tortures that I cannot endure them long. I know when he is going to her, I know it by his joy; and his peevishness tells me as plainly when he leaves her. He no longer troubles himself to conceal his feelings; I have become intolerable to him. She has an influence over him as unhealthy as she is herself in soul and body. You’ll see! she will exact from him, as the price of forgiveness, my public desertion, a rupture like her own; she will take him away from me to Switzerland or Italy. He is beginning now to say it is ridiculous that he knows nothing of Europe. I can guess what those words mean, flung out in advance. If Calyste is not cured of her in three months I don’t know what he may become; but as for me, I will kill myself.”

“But your soul, my unhappy child? Suicide is a mortal sin.”

“Don’t you understand? She may give him a child. And if Calyste loved the child of that woman more than mine—Oh! that’s the end of my patience and all my resignation.”

She fell into a chair. She had given vent to the deepest thought in her heart; she had no longer a hidden grief; and secret sorrow is like that iron rod that sculptors put within the structure of their clay—it supports, it is a force.

“Come, go home, dear sufferer. In view of such misery the abbe will surely give me absolution for the venial sins which the deceits of the world compel us to commit. Leave me now, my daughter,” she said, going to her prie-Dieu. “I must pray to our Lord and the Blessed Virgin for you, with special supplication. Good-bye, my dear Sabine; above all things, do not neglect your religious duties if you wish us to succeed.”

“And if we do triumph, mother, we shall only save the family. Calyste has killed within me the holy fervor of love—killed it by sickening me with all things. What a honey-moon was mine, in which I was made to feel on that first day the bitterness of a retrospective adultery!”

The next day, about two in the afternoon, the Abbe Brossette, one of the faubourg Saint-Germain vicars, crossed the court-yard of the hotel de Grandlieu with that ecclesiastical step signifying caution, mystery, calmness, gravity, and dignity. He had been appointed to a vacant bishopric in 1840 (an office refused by him for the third time). He was a thin man of about fifty, his face white and hollow from austerities. Two black eyes, ardent with faith yet softened by a mysterious expression, animated that apostolic face. He smiled as he mounted the steps, little believing in the enormity of the cases for which he was summoned; but the duchess’s open hand made her confessions worth his time.

When the vicar was announced the duchess rose, and made a few steps toward him in the salon,—a distinction she granted only to cardinals, bishops, simple priests, duchesses older than herself, and persons of royal blood.

“My dear abbe,” she said, pointing to a chair and speaking in a low voice, “I need your authority before I enter a rather wicked intrigue which may do great good; will it hinder my salvation?”

“Madame la duchesse,” replied the abbe, “do not mix up spiritual things with worldly things; they are usually irreconcilable. In the first place, what is this matter?”

“You know that my daughter Sabine is dying of grief; Monsieur du Guenic has left her for Madame de Rochefide.”

“It is very dreadful, very serious; but you know what our dear Saint Francois de Sales says on that subject. Remember too how Madame Guyon complained of the lack of mysticism in the proofs of conjugal love; she would have been very willing to see her husband with a Madame de Rochefide.”

“Sabine is only too gentle; she is almost too completely a Christian wife; but she has not the slightest taste for mysticism.”

“Poor young woman!” said the abbe, maliciously. “What method will you take to remedy the evil?”

“I have committed the sin, my dear director, of thinking how to launch upon Madame de Rochefide a little man, very self-willed and full of the worst qualities, who will certainly induce her to dismiss my son-in-law.”

“My daughter,” replied the abbe, stroking his chin, “we are not now in the confessional; I am not obliged to make myself your judge. From the world’s point of view, I admit that the result would be decisive—”

“The means seem to me odious,” she said.

“Why? No doubt the duty of a Christian woman is to withdraw a sinning woman from an evil path, rather than push her along it; but when a woman has advanced upon that path as far as Madame de Rochefide, it is not the hand of man, but that of God, which recalls such a sinner; she needs a thunderbolt.”

“Father,” replied the duchess, “I thank you for your indulgence; but the thought has occurred to me that my son-in-law is brave and a Breton. He was heroic at the time of the rash affair of that poor MADAME. Now, if the young fellow who undertook to make Madame de Rochefide love him were to quarrel with Calyste, and a duel should ensue—”

“You have thought wisely, Madame la duchesse; and it only proves that in crooked paths you will always find rocks of stumbling.”

“I have discovered a means, my dear abbe, to do a great good; to withdraw Madame de Rochefide from the fatal path in which she now is; to restore Calyste to his wife, and possibly to save from hell a poor distracted creature.”

“In that case, why consult me?” asked the vicar, smiling.

“Ah!” replied the duchess, “Because I must permit myself some rather nasty actions—”

“You don’t mean to rob anybody?”

“On the contrary, I shall apparently have to spend a great deal of money.”

“You will not calumniate, or—”

“Oh! oh!”

“—injure your neighbor?”

“I don’t know about that.”

“Come, tell me your plan,” said the abbe, now becoming curious.

“Suppose, instead of driving out one nail by another,—this is what I thought at my prie-Dieu after imploring the Blessed Virgin to enlighten me,—I were to free Calyste by persuading Monsieur de Rochefide to take back his wife? Instead of lending a hand to evil for the sake of doing good to my daughter, I should do one great good by another almost as great—”

The vicar looked at the Portuguese lady, and was pensive.

“That is evidently an idea that came to you from afar,” he said, “so far that—”

“I have thanked the Virgin for it,” replied the good and humble duchess; “and I have made a vow—not counting a novena—to give twelve hundred francs to some poor family if I succeed. But when I communicated my plan to Monsieur de Grandlieu he began to laugh, and said: ‘Upon my honor, at your time of life I think you women have a devil of your own.’”

“Monsieur le duc made as a husband the same reply I was about to make when you interrupted me,” said the abbe, who could not restrain a smile.

“Ah! Father, if you approve of the idea, will you also approve of the means of execution? It is necessary to do to a certain Madame Schontz (a Beatrix of the quartier Saint-Georges) what I proposed to do to Madame de Rochefide.”

“I am certain that you will not do any real wrong,” said the vicar, cleverly, not wishing to hear any more, having found the result so desirable. “You can consult me later if you find your conscience muttering,” he added. “But why, instead of giving that person in the rue Saint-Georges a fresh occasion for scandal, don’t you give her a husband?”

“Ah! my dear director, now you have rectified the only bad thing I had in my plan. You are worthy of being an archbishop, and I hope I shall not die till I have had the opportunity of calling you Your Eminence.”

“I see only one difficulty in all this,” said the abbe.

“What is that?”

“Suppose Madame de Rochefide chooses to keep your son-in-law after she goes back to her husband?”

“That’s my affair,” replied the duchess; “when one doesn’t often intrigue, one does so—”

“Badly, very badly,” said the abbe. “Habit is necessary for everything. Try to employ some of those scamps who live by intrigue, and don’t show your own hand.”

“Ah! monsieur l’abbe, if I make use of the means of hell, will Heaven help me?”

“You are not at confession,” repeated the abbe. “Save your child.”

The worthy duchess, delighted with her vicar, accompanied him to the door of the salon.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
A storm was gathering over Monsieur de Rochefide, who enjoyed the greatest happiness a Parisian could desire in being to Madame Schontz as much a husband as he had been to Beatrix. As the duke had said to his wife, it seemed almost impossible to upset so agreeable an existence. This view requires details of Rochefide’s life after his wife left, to show the enormous difference our laws and morals make between the sexes in the same situation: what becomes misery for the woman becomes happiness for the man. This contrast may encourage some young women to remain and struggle at home, like Sabine du Guenic, by practising whatever virtues they choose.

Some days after Beatrix abandoned him, Arthur de Rochefide, now an only child, found himself sole master of the hôtel de Rochefide, rue d’Anjou Saint-Honoré, and of two hundred thousand francs a year from his father, which, added to what he had at marriage, brought his income to a thousand francs a day. To a gentleman of the sort Mademoiselle des Touches had described, such wealth was happiness enough. While his wife stayed at home and fulfilled maternal duties, Rochefide enjoyed his fortune; he neither spent it extravagantly nor expanded his mind. Vanity, aided by good looks, repeated stage and journal wit, and a military joviality from serving in the Royal Guard, made him seem witty to unintellectual women, who did not contradict him.

Arthur was essentially an imitator without originality. He adopted and dropped fashions without taste of his own, was accused only of taking long at his toilet and wearing a corset, and pleased most by reflecting others’ ideas and follies, never growing old in public estimation.

As a husband he was pitied; people blamed Beatrix for deserting so good a fellow, and society taunted the woman. A member of all clubs and a subscriber to every patriotic and partisan absurdity, this loyal, brave, and very silly nobleman resembled many rich men. He sought to distinguish himself by adopting some fashionable mania: he glorified his name as the sultan of a four-footed harem, ruled by an old English groom, costing him four to five thousand francs a month. His specialty was running horses; he supported a hippic magazine though he knew little of horses and depended entirely on his groom. Thus this semi-bachelor had nothing truly his own—neither mind, taste, position, nor eccentricity; even his fortune came from his fathers. After the displeasures of marriage he was so content to be again a bachelor that he told friends he had been born with a caul.

Pleased to live without the costs of appearance demanded of husbands, his house—unchanged since his father’s death—resembled a traveling master’s: he lived there little, seldom dined, and rarely slept. The reason lay in his new liaison.

Bored by fashionable women, after various amorous adventures Rochefide had married, in effect, a certain Madame Schontz, celebrated in the world of Fanny Beaupré, Susanne du Val-Noble, Florine, Mariette, Jenny Cadine. This world—mocked by an artist at an opera galop—has appeared elsewhere in this history of 19th-century French manners; to depict it faithfully one must proportion the number of such figures to their varied endings: poverty, early or self-inflicted death, lucky marriages, or opulence.

Madame Schontz, at first called La Petite-Aurélie, belongs to the highest class of women whose social utility cannot be questioned: without the Aspasias of the Notre-Dame de Lorette quarter, far fewer houses would be built in Paris. They are pioneers on Montmartre’s heights, seeking speculation, pitched in carved free-stone solitudes that line European streets, architectural steppes where papers advertise apartments to let.

Their position depends on where they camp in the apocryphal regions: near rue de Provence a woman fares well; approach the Boulevard Extérieur or Batignolles and she becomes destitute. When Rochefide first encountered Madame Schontz, she lived on the third floor of the only remaining house in rue de Berlin—on the border between misery and its reverse. Her real name was not Schontz or Aurélie; she concealed her father’s name, an old soldier of the Empire, often a figure at the dawn of such feminine existences, either as father or seducer. Madame Schontz had had the Saint-Denis education, admirably accomplished yet offering no openings when girls left the school—an admirable creation of the Emperor, now lacking the Emperor himself.

Aurelie was the daughter of the intrepid Colonel Schiltz, an Alsatian leader who nearly saved the Emperor in the 1814 campaign; he died at Metz ruined. Napoleon placed the little Josephine Schiltz, about nine, at Saint-Denis. Having lost both parents and with no resources, she remained after the Bourbons returned, served as under-mistress until 1827, but her patience failed; her beauty seduced her. At majority Josephine Schiltz—Empress’s goddaughter—was on the verge of the courtesan’s adventurous life, wooed by the fatal example of comrades without resources. She substituted Aurélie and took Saint-Aurélie for a patron saint.

Lively, witty, and well-educated, she committed more faults than her duller companions, whose misdemeanors were base and self-interested. Having known various writers, clever but deeply in debt, tried rich but foolish men, and sacrificed solid interests to one true love, she went through all the schools of experience. One day of extreme misery, when at Valentino’s she danced in borrowed gown, hat, and mantle, she attracted Rochefide, who had come to see the galop. Her cleverness captivated a man who had not yet fixed his passion. Two years after Beatrix’s desertion, Rochefide was not blamed for marrying, so to speak, in the thirteenth arrondissement, a substitute for his wife.

Let us sketch the four periods of this happiness; the strategy of passion in the thirteenth arrondissement is similar for all who come under its rule: marquis in his forties, sexagenary retired shopkeeper, quadruple millionaire or moderate man—the heart and the money-box always hold the same relation. This will show the difficulties the duchess would face in her plans about him.

One expression, “tirer une carotte” (to dupe), has become so popular it must be allowed here. In the thirteenth arrondissement patois penetrates everything: tirer une carotte can mean to dupe. Rochefide, like all little minds, feared being carotted. The noun became a verb. From the start of his passion for Madame Schontz, Arthur guarded against being duped, and he was, therefore, very “rat”—a word meaning niggard when applied to a man (but guest when applied to a girl).

Madame Schontz had too much sense and knew men too well not to conceive great hopes from such beginnings. Rochefide allowed her five hundred francs a month, furnished her rather shabby second-floor rooms in rue Coquenard costing 1,200 francs a year, and set himself to study Aurélie’s character while she, perceiving his intent, gave him a character to study. Rochefide was happy to find in her a woman of noble nature; he imagined her mother a Barnheim of Baden, and Aurelie’s upbringing confirmed the illusion. She spoke English, German, Italian, knew foreign literatures, could hold her own against second-class pianists, and behaved about her talents like a well-bred woman—she never mentioned them. She took up painting half in jest and produced a head that astonished. For amusement during her tenure at Saint-Denis she had advanced in the sciences; later life covered those seeds, yet she let Arthur take credit for their sprouting.

Aurelie began by showing disinterestedness equal to her other charms, which allowed this weak corvette to fix its grapnels on the larger vessel. But about the end of the first year, she made ignoble noises in the antechamber with her clogs, arriving when Rochefide awaited her with a draggled gown. By this time she had persuaded her gros papa that her ambition was to obtain honorably a comfortable bourgeois existence; about ten months after their meeting, the second phase of happiness declared itself.

She obtained a fine apartment in rue Neuve-Saint-Georges. Arthur, who could no longer conceal his fortune, gave her splendid furniture, a complete service of plate, 1,200 francs a month, a hired low carriage with one horse—and a tiger. Madame Schontz was not the least grateful; she knew the motive of his conduct and recognized the male rat’s calculations. Sick of restaurant life, Rochefide offered Aurelie forty francs a day to cover his dinner and that of a friend; she accepted.

Having cashed in all her moral letters of credit, she was listened to favorably when she asked for 500 francs more a month for dress to avoid shaming her gros papa, whose friends belonged to the Jockey Club.

“It would be a pretty thing,” she said, “if Rastignac, Maxime de Trailles, d’Esgrignon, La Roche-Hugon, Ronqueroles, Laginski, Lenoncourt, found you with a sort of Madame Everard. Besides, have confidence in me, papa, and you’ll be the gainer.”

Aurelie contrived to display new virtues in this second phase. She assumed the housekeeping role for which she claimed credit: she said she balanced two thousand five hundred francs a month without debt—a rare achievement in the faubourg Saint-Germain of the thirteenth arrondissement—and served dinners superior to Nucingen’s, with exquisite wines at twelve francs a bottle. Rochefide, amazed and delighted to host friends economically, declared as he caught her round the waist, “She’s a treasure!”

He soon hired a third of an Opera box for her and took her to first representations. He began consulting Aurelie and took credit for her clever sayings, which raised his reputation as an amusing man. He acquired certainty of being truly loved and for himself alone. Aurelie refused a Russian prince offering five thousand francs a month.

“You are a lucky man, my dear marquis,” cried old Prince Galathionne at the club. “Yesterday I tried to get Madame Schontz away from you, but she said: ‘Prince, you are not handsomer, but you are a great deal older than Rochefide; you would beat me, but he is like a father to me; can you give me one-tenth of a reason why I should change? I’ve never had the grand passion for Arthur that I once had for little fools in varnished boots and whose debts I paid; but I love him as a wife loves her husband when she is an honest woman.’ And thereupon she showed me the door.”

This speech, not exaggerated, increased the neglect and degradation in the hôtel de Rochefide. Arthur shifted his whole existence to Madame Schontz and prospered; after three years he had four hundred thousand francs to invest.

The third phase began. Madame Schontz became the tenderest of mothers to Arthur’s son; she fetched him from school, showered him with presents and pocket-money. She took part in managing Arthur’s property: she made him buy into the Funds when low—just before the treaty of London that overturned the ministry of March 1st—and Arthur gained two hundred thousand francs by that transaction; Aurelie did not claim a penny. Rochefide invested six hundred thousand in Bank of France stock and put half in Josephine Schiltz’s name. A little house in rue de La Bruyère was hired and given to Grindot, that great decorator, to make it a bonbon-box.

Henceforth Rochefide ceased managing his affairs. Madame Schontz received the revenues and paid the bills. Practically his wife and woman of business, she justified her position by making her gros papa more comfortable than ever; she had learned his fancies and gratified them as Madame de Pompadour gratified Louis XV. In short, Madame Schontz became absolute mistress. She began to patronize a few young artists and men of letters, newly famous and keen to make reputations with little to accomplish.

Her conduct, a triumph of tactics, revealed her superiority. A dozen young fellows amused Arthur, supplying witty sayings and opinions without questioning the mistress’s fidelity; they proclaimed her eminently intelligent. These living advertisements soon set Madame Schontz up as the most agreeable woman on the borderland between the thirteenth arrondissement and the rest. Her rivals—Suzanne Gaillard, Fanny Beaupré, Mariette, Antonia—spread droll calumnies about the beauty of those young men and Rochefide’s complacent reception of them. Madame Schontz, who could out-blague those ladies by three turns, told them once at Nathan’s supper, after recounting her fortune and success, “Do as much yourselves!”—a remark they remembered.

During this period she made Arthur sell his race-horses, through arguments derived perhaps from Claude Vignon, one of her habitués.

“I can conceive,” she said after lashing the horses with wit, “that princes and rich men should set their hearts on horse-flesh, but only for the good of the country, not for betting. If you had a stud farm and could raise a thousand or twelve hundred horses, and all of France’s horses entered into one great competition, it would be fine; but you buy animals as managers of theatres trade in artists; you degrade an institution to gambling; you make a Bourse of legs, as of stocks. It is unworthy. Don’t you spend sixty thousand francs sometimes merely to read in the newspapers: ‘Lélia, belonging to Monsieur de Rochefide, beat by a length Fleur-de-Genet the property of Monsieur le Duc de Rhetore’? You had much better give that money to poets, who would carry you to immortality in prose and verse.’”

By being prodded, Rochefide saw the hollowness of the turf and economized sixty thousand francs; the next year Madame Schontz remarked, “I don’t cost you anything now, Arthur.”

Many rich men envied Rochefide and tried to entice Madame Schontz away, but, like the Russian prince, they wasted their old age.

“Listen to me,” she told Finot, now immensely rich. “I am certain Rochefide would forgive me a little passion if I fell in love, but one doesn’t leave a marquis with a kind heart like that for a parvenu like you. You couldn’t keep me in the position in which Arthur has placed me; he has made me half a wife and a lady, and that’s more than you could do even if you married me.”

This last point clinched the fetters of that happy galley-slave: the speech, of course, reached the ears for which it was intended.

The fourth phase had begun: habit, the final victory in these campaigns, which make the women of this class say of a man, “I hold him!” Rochefide, who had just bought the little hôtel in Mademoiselle Josephine Schiltz’s name (a trifle of eighty thousand francs), had reached, as the Duchesse de Grandlieu planned, the stage of finding vanity in his mistress—whom he now called Ninon II.—by boasting of her scrupulous honesty, excellent manners, education, and wit. He had merged his defects, merits, tastes, and pleasures into Madame Schontz, and was now, from lassitude, indifference, or philosophy, a man unable to change, clinging to wife or mistress.

In five years Madame Schontz had so consolidated her position that introductions to her had to be proposed before being granted. She refused to receive dull rich people and smirched people, admitting only certain great aristocratic names.

Ostensibly she possessed the three hundred thousand francs Rochefide had given her, invested and managed by a broker named Gobenheim—the only broker admitted to her house. Secretly she manipulated another little fortune of two hundred thousand francs, the result of savings over three years and of constant movement of the known three hundred thousand—for she never admitted more than that known sum.

“The more you make, the less you get rich,” Gobenheim told her.

“Water is so dear,” she answered.

This secret hoard was increased by jewels and diamonds, which Aurelie wore for a month and then sold. When anyone called her rich, Madame Schontz replied that at the Funds’ interest three hundred thousand francs produced only twelve thousand, and she had spent as much in the hardest days of her life.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Such conduct implied a plan, and Madame Schontz had one. Jealous for two years of Madame du Bruel, she was consumed with the ambition to be married by church and mayor. Every social position has a forbidden fruit—some small thing magnified until it becomes the weightiest concern. This ambition involved a second Arthur; none had yet discovered Rochefide’s secret rival. Bixiou fancied Leon de Lora the favored one; the painter suspected Bixiou, who, past forty, ought to be making a fate. Suspicions also fell on Victor de Vernisset, a Canalis-school poet desperately in love; he accused Stidmann, a young sculptor, of rivalry. That artist, charming and ambitious to be another Cellini, worked for jewellers and bronze manufacturers. Claude Vignon, the young Comte de la Palferine, Gobenheim, Vermanton—a cynical philosopher—all frequented the salon and were suspected, then proved innocent. No one fathomed Madame Schontz, certainly not Rochefide, who thought she preferred the young, witty La Palferine; she was virtuous from self-interest and wholly bent on making a good marriage.

Only one man of equivocal reputation was ever seen in Madame Schontz’s salon: Couture, who had more than once made his brother speculators howl. Couture had been one of Madame Schontz’s earliest friends, and she alone remained faithful to him. The false alarm of 1840 swept away the last vestige of this stock-gambler’s credit; Aurelie, seeing his ill-luck, made Rochefide play, as we have seen, in the other direction. Glad to find a place at Aurelie’s table, Couture—who sometimes received a thousand-franc note from Finot, the cleverest or luckiest of parvenus—was shrewd enough to offer his hand and name to Madame Schontz. She studied him to see if the bold speculator had political power and sufficient gratitude not to desert his wife. Couture, about forty-three, half worn-out, did not redeem the unpleasant sonority of his name by birth; he said little of the authors of his days.

Madame Schontz was bemoaning the scarcity of eligible men when Couture presented to her a provincial, supplied with the two handles by which women take hold of such pitchers when they wish to keep them. To sketch this person is to paint a portion of the youth of the day.

In 1838, Fabien du Ronceret, son of a chief-justice of the Royal court at Caen (recently deceased), left Alençon, resigning his judgeship—an office his father had compelled him to hold—and came to Paris to make a noise there. A Norman ambition, difficult to realize on an income scarcely scraping eight thousand francs a year; his mother still held a life-interest in a valuable estate in Alençon. In earlier visits he had tried his rope like an acrobat and had perceived the great vice of the social replastering of 1830. He meant to turn it to profit, following the example of the longest heads of the bourgeoisie. This requires a glance at one effect of the new order.

Modern equality, unduly developed in our day, has produced in private life—parallel to political life—three great divisions of the social I: pride, conceit, and vanity. Fools wish to pass for wits; wits want to be thought men of talent; men of talent want to be treated as genius. This tendency, which in the Chamber makes the manufacturer jealous of the statesman and the administrator jealous of the writer, leads fools to disparage wits, wits to disparage men of talent, and men of talent to disparage those who outstrip them. By pulling down recognized superiorities, a nation opens the sluice through which a torrent of secondary ambitions rushes, each meaner than the last, and the smallest resolves to lead. Democrats say there was an evil in the aristocracy, but they substitute a dozen armed, contending aristocracies—the worst of all. Proclaiming equality, they promulgate a declaration of the rights of Envy. We inherit the saturnalia of the Revolution transferred to the domains of the mind, industry, and politics; reputations won by toil, service, and talent are treated like privileges taken from the masses. Distinction is sought at any price—by ridicule, by affectation, by little public causes—creating fictitious dignities and a profusion of presidents, vice-presidents, and secretaries for societies whose numbers exceed the questions they pretend to solve. Society on a grand scale has been demolished to make a million little ones in the image of the defunct. These parasitic organizations reveal decomposition: are they not maggots in a dead body? All these societies are daughters of one mother, Vanity. Catholic charity or true beneficence proceed differently; they study and cure wounds rather than perorate in public meetings for the pleasure of perorating.

Fabien du Ronceret, without being superior, had divined—by the greedy common-sense peculiar to a Norman—the gain he could derive from this public vice. Every epoch has a character clever men exploit. Fabien’s mind, though not clever, was wholly bent on making himself talked about.

“My dear fellow, a man must make himself talked about, if he wants to be anything,” he said on parting from the king of Alençon, a certain du Bousquier, a friend of his father. “In six months I shall be better known than you are!”

So Fabien obeyed the spirit of his age. He made his debut in Bohemia, where he was known as “The Heir” because of premeditated prodigalities. Du Ronceret profited by Couture’s follies for the pretty Madame Cadine: during an ephemeral opulence he had arranged a delightful ground-floor apartment with garden in the rue Blanche. The Norman, who wanted luxury ready-made, bought Couture’s furniture and the improvements he was forced to leave—kiosk, rustic gallery, India mattings, potteries—though he called the result his den and never acknowledged the architect Grindot, the carvings of Stidmann, or the paintings of Leon de Lora—Fabien’s crowning vanity lied for the sake of magnifying himself.

He crowned the magnificence with a greenhouse built along a southern wall—not through any love of flowers but to attack public notice through horticulture. He had nearly reached his end. Elected vice-president of a floral society presided over by the Duc de Vissembourg, he wore the Legion of Honor ribbon at an exhibition, delivered an opening speech bought from Lousteau for five hundred francs and boldly pronounced it his own, and made a stir by presenting a flower given him by old Blondet of Alençon as the product of his greenhouse.

But this was nothing. The Heir, who wanted to be accepted as a wit, planned to consort with clever celebrities and reflect their fame—hard to do on eight thousand francs a year. He repeatedly asked Bixiou, Stidmann, and Leon de Lora to present him to Madame Schontz and allow him into her menagerie of lions. Failing these, he applied to Couture, for whose dinners he had so often paid that the late speculator felt obliged to recommend him to Madame Schontz, if only as an elegant unpaid footman whom mistresses employ to run errands when servants are lacking.

In three evenings Madame Schontz read Fabien like a book and said to herself, “If Couture does not suit me, I am certain of saddling that one. My future can go on two legs now.” This queer fellow whom everybody laughed at was really the chosen one—chosen, however, with an intention that made such preference insulting. The improbability of the choice kept suspicion away. Madame Schontz intoxicated Fabien with secret smiles and little scenes on the threshold when she bade him good-night, if Rochefide stayed. She often made Fabien a third with Arthur in her opera-box, excusing it by saying he had done her some service. Men have a natural conceit common as to women—the belief of being loved exclusively. Of all flattering passions none is more prized than that of a Madame Schontz: the man she makes the object of a love she calls “from the heart,” as distinct from another sort. A woman like her, who plays the great lady and whose intrinsic value is real, would be an object of pride to Fabien, who fell in love so that he never presented himself before her eyes except in full dress, varnished boots, lemon-kid gloves, embroidered shirt and frill, variegated waistcoat—in short, with all the external symptoms of profound worship.

A month before the duchess’s conference with her confessor, Madame Schontz confided the secret of her birth and real name to Fabien, who did not at all understand the motive. A fortnight later she was surprised at his want of intelligence and exclaimed to herself, “Heavens! how stupid I am! he expects me to love him for himself.” Accordingly she took the Heir in her calèche to the Bois—she now had two little carriages—to discuss her future and declared she wished to marry.

“I have seven hundred thousand francs,” she said, “and if I could find a man full of ambition who understands my character, I would change my position; for do you know the dream of my life? To become a true bourgeoise, enter an honorable family, and make my husband and children truly happy.”

The Norman wished to be “distinguished” by Madame Schontz, but marrying her seemed a folly to a bachelor of thirty-eight whom the revolution of July had made a judge. Seeing his hesitation, Madame Schontz made him the butt of her wit and disdain and turned to Couture. Within a week Couture, whom she put upon the scent of her fortune, had offered his hand, heart, and future—three things of about the same value.

The manoeuvres of Madame Schontz had reached this stage when the Duchesse de Grandlieu began inquiries into the life of the Béatrix of the Place Saint-Georges.

Following the Abbe Brossette’s advice, the duchess asked the Marquis d’Ajuda to bring the celebrated Comte Maxime de Trailles—the archduke of Bohemia, political cut-throat and youngest of young men though fully fifty. D’Ajuda dined with Maxime at the club in the rue de Beuane and proposed afterward to go play dummy whist with the Duc de Grandlieu, who was feigning gout.

Maxime did not deceive himself about the invitation’s meaning; he felt certain the duke or duchess needed him. Club life—men playing cards with others they do not receive at home—is a telling sign of the age.

After several games the duke went to bed, leaving his wife tête-à-tête with Maxime and d’Ajuda. The duchess, seconded by the marquis, revealed her project and asked Maxime’s assistance while ostensibly seeking only his advice. Maxime listened without committing, waiting until she asked point-blank.

“Madame, I fully understand you,” he said, casting that shrewd, penetrating look by which great scamps compromise their interlocutors. “D’Ajuda will tell you that if any one in Paris can conduct that difficult negotiation it is I—of course without mixing you up in it; without it being even known that I have come here this evening. Only, before anything is done, we must settle preliminaries. How much are you willing to sacrifice?”

“All that is necessary.”

“Very well, then, Madame la duchesse. As the price of my efforts you must do me the honor to receive in your house and seriously protect Madame la Comtesse de Trailles.”

“What! are you married?” cried d’Ajuda.

“I shall be married within a fortnight to the heiress of a rich but extremely bourgeois family—a sacrifice to opinion! I imbibe the very spirit of my government and start upon a new career. Consequently, Madame la duchesse will understand how important it is to have my wife adopted by her and her family. I am certain of being made deputy by my father-in-law’s resignation, and I am promised a diplomatic post in keeping with my new fortune. I do not see why my wife should not be as well received as Madame de Portenduere in that society of young women. My wife is pretty, and I will undertake to uncotton-night-cap her. Will this suit you, Madame la duchesse? You are religious, and if you say yes, your promise, which I know to be sacred, will greatly aid my change of life. It will be one more good action to your account. Alas! I have long been the king of mauvais sujets, and I want to make an end of it. After all, we bear, azure, a wyvern or, darting fire... and we have been counts since Catherine de’ Medici.”

“I will receive and protect your wife,” said the duchess solemnly, “and my family will not turn its back upon her; I give you my word.”

“Ah! Madame la duchesse,” cried Maxime, visibly touched, “if Monsieur le duc would also deign to treat me with some kindness, I promise you to make your plan succeed without its costing you very much. But,” he paused, “you must take upon yourself to follow my instructions. This is the last intrigue of my bachelor life; it must be all the better managed because it concerns a good action.”

“Follow your instructions!” the duchess replied. “Then I must appear in all this.”

“Ah! madame, I will not compromise you,” Maxime protested. “I esteem you too much to demand guarantees. I merely mean that you must follow my advice. For example, it will be necessary that du Guenic be taken away by his wife for at least two years; she must show him Switzerland, Italy, Germany—in short, all possible countries.”

“You confirm a fear of my director,” said the duchess naively, recalling the Abbe Brossette’s prudence.

Maxime and d’Ajuda smiled at the idea of an agreement between heaven and hell.

“To prevent Madame de Rochefide from ever seeing Calyste again,” the duchess continued, “we will all travel—Juste and his wife, Calyste, Sabine, and I. I will leave Clotilde with her father—”

“It is too soon to sing victory, madame,” said Maxime. “I foresee enormous difficulties; though I shall no doubt vanquish them. Your esteem and protection are rewards which would make me commit the vilest actions, but these will be—”

“The vilest actions!” cried the duchess, whose piety disclosed selfishness.

“And you would share them, madame, inasmuch as I am only your agent. But are you ignorant of the degree of blindness to which Madame de Rochefide has brought your son-in-law? I know it from Canalis and Nathan, between whom she was hesitating when Calyste threw himself into the lioness’s jaws. Béatrix has contrived to persuade that serious Breton that she has never loved any one but him; that she is virtuous; that Conti was merely a sentimental head-love—in short, a musical love. As for Rochefide, that was duty. So, you understand, she is virgin!—a fact she proves by forgetting her son, whom for more than a year she has not tried to see. The little count will soon be twelve, and he finds in Madame Schontz a mother who is all the more a mother because maternity is, as you know, a passion with women of that sort. Du Guenic would let himself be cut in pieces and would chop up his wife for Béatrix; and you think it easy to drag a man from such credulity! Ah! madame, Shakespeare’s Iago would lose all his handkerchiefs. People mistake theatrical passion for true love. Love, Madame la duchesse, is not loving a noble woman; it is to say to oneself: ‘She whom I love is infamous; she deceives me; she is abandoned; she is hellish,’ yet we rush to her and find there the blue of heaven. That is how Molière loved, and how we, scamps that we are, love. As for me, I weep at the great scene of Arnolphe. Now, that is how your son-in-law loves Béatrix. I shall have trouble separating Rochefide from Madame Schontz; but Madame Schontz will no doubt lend herself to the plot; I shall study her interior. But as for Calyste and Béatrix, they will need blows of an axe, far deeper treachery, and so base an infamy that your virtuous imagination could never descend to it—unless indeed your director gave you a hand. You have asked the impossible; you shall be obeyed. But in spite of my settled intention to war with fire and sword, I cannot absolutely promise you success. I have known lovers who did not recoil before the most awful disillusions. You are too virtuous to know the full power of women who are not virtuous.”

“Do not enter upon those infamous actions until I consult the Abbe Brossette to know how far I may be your accomplice,” cried the duchess, with a naiveté that revealed the selfishness in her piety.

“You shall be ignorant of everything, my dear mother,” interposed d’Ajuda.

On the portico, as the marquis’s carriage drew up, d’Ajuda said to Maxime: “You frightened that good duchess.”

“But she has no idea of the difficulty of what she asks. Let us go to the Jockey Club; Rochefide must invite me to dine with Madame Schontz tomorrow, for to-night my plan will be made, and I shall have chosen the pawns on my chessboard to carry it out. In the days of her splendor Béatrix refused to receive me; I intend to pay off that score, and I will avenge your sister-in-law so cruelly that perhaps she will find herself too well revenged.”

The next day Rochefide told Madame Schontz that Maxime de Trailles was coming to dinner. That meant notifying her to display all her luxury and prepare the choicest food for this connoisseur emeritus, whom all women of Madame Schontz’s type revered. Madame Schontz considered her toilette and her house with the same care she would give to presenting to such a personage.

In Paris there are as many royalties as varieties of art, mental and moral specialties, sciences, and professions; the strongest and most capable of their practitioners has a majesty all his own and is respected by peers who know their art’s difficulties. Maxime was, in the eyes of rats and courtesans, an extremely powerful and capable man who had known how to make himself excessively loved. He was also admired by men who appreciate the difficulty of living in Paris on good terms with creditors; in short, he had no rival in elegance, deportment, and wit except the illustrious de Marsay, who often employed him on political missions. All this explains his interview with the duchess, his prestige with Madame Schontz, and the authority of his words in a conference he planned to hold on the boulevard des Italiens with a young man already known, though newly arrived, in the Bohemia of Paris.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The next day Maxime de Trailles summoned Finot and arranged, pretending a cafe Anglais breakfast with Couture and Lousteau so he could learn about Madame Schontz. Finot, who deferred to Maxime, complied. At the breakfast Couture, prompted by Finot and unwittingly by Lousteau, revealed what Maxime wished to know.

About one o’clock Maxime loitered on Tortoni’s portico with du Tillet, ostensibly occupied but waiting for the Comte de la Palferine. When the prince of Bohemia arrived, Maxime drew him aside and asked if La Palferine had debts—fifty or a hundred thousand? The count admitted only six thousand; Maxime shrugged that small sums can hamper more than great ones, praised the young man’s spirit, and offered him help: twenty thousand francs and a scheme to make a woman love him within ten days. La Palferine, flattered though feeling inferior, accepted. Maxime instructed him to meet that evening at Madame Schontz’s and to report nightly at one a.m. on the boulevard de la Madeleine.

Maxime intended to use Madame d’Espard’s dislike of Beatrix to further this plan; he called at the Hotel de Grandlieu and found the duchess, Madame du Guenic, and Clotilde upset: Calyste had not returned, and Beatrix was distraught. Maxime urged secrecy and proposed a plot requiring twenty thousand francs and perhaps offices—he hinted at a receiver-generalship as inducement.

Madame Schontz had invited Claude Vignon, Couture, Fabien du Ronceret (the Heir), Bixiou, Leon de Lora, La Palferine, and Nathan—nine guests of talent or ambition. Madame Schontz, anxious to seem young and beautiful, dressed with art: a guipure pelerine, blue velvet gown, opals, and smooth hair. She had become ebonpoint but still had a celebrated head. Maxime arrived, praised Rochefide’s good fortune through her, and bantered about art versus lorette; Aurelie insisted she saw herself as an artist and a progenitrix of honest men.

Claude Vignon expressed literary opinions and Maxime teased him about Camille Maupin. The guests chatted; Maxime privately handed La Palferine the twenty thousand-franc notes, telling him not to economize and directing Nathan to present him to Madame la Marquise de Rochefide two nights hence. Maxime urged a drunken display and charm; La Palferine pledged to report nightly.

Fabien du Ronceret, the Heir, at table; Maxime scorned his waiter-like dress but learned he had some connection with d’Esgrignon. The dinner was lavish, and after the meal Maxime confided to Couture a scheme: if Couture wanted steadiness, Madame de Rochefide could obtain a receiver-generalship for him and Aurelie’s million would secure it, but Maxime wanted Couture’s vote in return. Couture pledged allegiance. Maxime then drove La Palferine home.

That night, Madame Schontz and Fabien flirted; when Arthur Rochefide accidentally surprised them, Aurelie played wounded virtue and threatened to marry Fabien, humiliating Arthur. Maxime advised Aurelie on how to force the issue—rouse jealousy, make Arthur see himself as unloved, and demand a dramatic parting—promising Fabien a chief-justiceship and the Legion of Honor soon. The scene instigated domestic warfare: Arthur woke to Aurelie’s icy sarcasm. She accused him of scheming to reconcile with Madame de Rochefide, and he protested. She threatened to leave him and refused his offers, preferring to cultivate Fabien.

Rochefide, in despair, sought Maxime’s counsel at the club. Maxime suggested that Arthur needed to show less obvious devotion and perhaps turn toward another woman, Madame Antonia, to recover self-respect and his wife’s return. Though Arthur wished to remain faithful, Maxime urged a practical plan. Rochefide hurried home but found Aurelie had contrived a compromising scene: Fabien’s hat had been left, and the maid’s clumsy removal suggested intimacy. Arthur, devastated, submitted.

Within a week La Palferine transformed: he paid debts, adopted a carriage, joined clubs, and published a successful novelette. Nathan, who promoted him to Madame de Rochefide, told Beatrix that La Palferine adored her. Ten days after Maxime’s arrangement, the count made his debut at Beatrix’s house while Calyste was at a party. Nathan primed her curiosity with artful reticence and lauded La Palferine’s prowess, implying his skill as a lover, which heightened Beatrix’s interest. The law of contraries played: courtesans sometimes yearn for virtue, and virtuous women secretly desire libertinism; Nathan exploited this, and Beatrix began to question whether she had been duped by her upbringing.

The next day Calyste seemed to Beatrix a loyal but unimaginative gentleman; after the dazzling soirée his plainness failed to satisfy her hunger for brilliance. She feared a meeting between Calyste and La Palferine; Maxime’s maneuver soon forced a public humiliation. At the opera, where Beatrix sat in an obscure box, she exited and was recognized on the crowded staircase; whispers and stares left her isolated. La Palferine, graciously offering his arm, escorted her, sat with her in her carriage, and rode home beside her, to Calyste’s stupefaction. In the salon, the count conversed brilliantly, ignoring Calyste, who seethed. La Palferine left on a witty note, ensuring the lovers’ quarrel.

Maxime, watching from the Jockey Club, checked on Aurelie’s progress. Madame Schontz, pleased with her strategy, had managed to eject Arthur: she had led Fabien to believe she would reform and marry him, and Fabien, intoxicated and ambitious, embraced the project. Maxime promised Fabien the promised offices. Two days later Charles-Edouard told Maxime, “It is done.” Aurelie had turned Arthur out; Maxime consoled the marquis and suggested a reconciliation could be bought with three hundred thousand francs and a new match arranged for him.

Meanwhile the duchess learned Calyste planned to leave for Italy; Sabine wanted to follow and even bought pistols. Maxime counselled d’Ajuda to silence, promising that Madame de Rochefide would not leave Paris but would soon separate from Calyste. He arranged for his own marriage to be accepted publicly and urged that the duchess travel to Italy soon.

Beatrix, now alternately consumed by passion and disdain, demanded of Calyste that he abandon Sabine to prove his devotion. Entrenched, she thought him unlikely to break with the Grandlieus because Sabine’s fortune mattered. Yet Calyste, driven by despair, obtained a passport and funds from his mother, and nine days after La Palferine’s opening success he resolved to force reconciliation. He arrived at Beatrix’s house intending to oust La Palferine and depart with her. Antoine, the old footman, sought to shield her by telling La Palferine she was out, but when La Palferine appeared Calyste watched him depart in a carriage; Beatrix, desperate, sent La Palferine a long letter of desperate devotion—an unprecedented signed confession.

When La Palferine called next, Beatrix, ensnared and overjoyed, embraced him. He proposed a condition: she must be reconciled with Rochefide, restore her social honor, return to the hotel de Rochefide and play the grand lady in public; she must achieve this by political means and persistence. He had already arranged for the reconciliation; she had instructed La Palferine to insist on it. Calyste, repeatedly refused by Antoine and by La Palferine’s household, left letters for La Palferine and begged to be heard. Eventually La Palferine and Maxime confronted him and, with cold civility, showed him the six unopened letters he had sent: La Palferine had no wish to cause scandal, and he disclosed that Beatrix had taken him up in her carriage after leaving the opera and had insisted on bringing back Rochefide. Rochefide had been living with Madame Schontz, who had left Paris, and had returned with Aurelie to Nogent-sur-Marne while the Hôtel de Rochefide would be restored for the marquise’s triumphant return. La Palferine advised Calyste to resume his life with Sabine after three months and not to regret Beatrix: she was vain, incomplete both for vice and virtue, and would have abandoned him without remorse.

Calyste left stunned but relieved to have his disillusionments pierced. Three days later the Duchesse de Grandlieu found Calyste content at home with Sabine planning the layette; Sabine whispered to the duchess, “I am loved, mother, and forever!”

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d’ — Father Goriot; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Secrets of a Princess

Bixiou, Jean-Jacques — The Purse; A Bachelor’s Establishment; The Government Clerks; Modeste Mignon; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Firm of Nucingen; The Muse of the Department; Cousin Betty; The Member for Arcis; A Man of Business; Gaudissart II.; The Unconscious Humorists; Cousin Pons

Blondet (Judge) — Jealousies of a Country Town

Brossette, Abbe — The Peasantry

Cadine, Jenny — Cousin Betty; The Unconscious Humorists; The Member for Arcis

Cambremer, Pierre — A Seaside Tragedy

Canalis, Constant-Cyr-Melchior, Baron de — Letters of Two Brides; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Modeste Mignon; The Magic Skin; Another Study of Woman; A Start in Life; The Unconscious Humorists; The Member for Arcis

Casteran, De — The Chouans; The Seamy Side of History; Jealousies of a Country Town; The Peasantry

Chocardelle, Mademoiselle — A Prince of Bohemia; A Man of Business; Cousin Betty; The Member for Arcis

Conti, Gennaro — Lost Illusions

Espard, Jeanne-Clementine-Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d’ — The Commission in Lunacy; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Letters of Two Brides; Another Study of Woman; The Gondreville Mystery; The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve

Ferdinand — The Chouans

Gaillard, Theodore — A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Unconscious Humorists

Gaillard, Madame Theodore — Jealousies of a Country Town; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Bachelor’s Establishment; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Unconscious Humorists

Galathionne, Prince and Princess — The Secrets of a Princess; The Middle Classes; Father Goriot; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Daughter of Eve

Gerard, Francois-Pascal-Simon, Baron — A Bachelor’s Establishment

Gobenheim — Cesar Birotteau

Grandlieu, Duchesse Ferdinand de — Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; A Daughter of Eve

Grindot — Cesar Birotteau; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Start in Life; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; The Middle Classes; Cousin Betty

Guenic, Gaudebert-Calyste-Charles, Baron du — The Chouans

Halga, Chevalier du — The Purse

Hannequin, Leopold — Albert Savarus; Cousin Betty

La Palferine, Comte de — A Prince of Bohemia; A Man of Business; Cousin Betty; The Imaginary Mistress

Lenoncourt, Duc de — The Lily of the Valley; Cesar Birotteau; Jealousies of a Country Town; The Gondreville Mystery

Lora, Leon de — The Unconscious Humorists; A Bachelor’s Establishment; A Start in Life; Pierre Grassou; Honorine; Cousin Betty

Lousteau, Etienne — A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Bachelor’s Establishment; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; A Daughter of Eve; The Muse of the Department; Cousin Betty; A Prince of Bohemia; A Man of Business; The Middle Classes; The Unconscious Humorists

Maufrigneuse, Georges de — The Secrets of a Princess; The Gondreville Mystery; The Member for Arcis

Maufrigneuse, Berthe de — The Gondreville Mystery; The Member for Arcis

Portenduere, Vicomte Savinien de — The Ball at Sceaux; Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life; Ursule Mirouet

Portenduere, Vicomtesse Savinien de — Ursule Mirouet; Another Study of Woman

Rochefide, Marquis Arthur de — Cousin Betty

Rochefide, Marquise de — The Secrets of a Princess; A Daughter of Eve; Sarrasine; A Prince of Bohemia

Ronceret, Du — Jealousies of a Country Town

Ronceret, Fabien-Felicien du (or Duronceret) — Jealousies of a Country Town; Gaudissart II

Ronceret, Madame Fabien du — The Muse of the Department; Cousin Betty; The Unconscious Humorists

Simeuse, Admiral de — The Gondreville Mystery; Jealousies of a Country Town

Stidmann — Modeste Mignon; The Member for Arcis; Cousin Betty; Cousin Pons; The Unconscious Humorists

Touches, Mademoiselle Felicite des — Beatrix; Lost Illusions; A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Bachelor’s Establishment; Another Study of Woman; A Daughter of Eve; Honorine; The Muse of the Department

Trailles, Comte Maxime de — Cesar Birotteau; Father Goriot; Gobseck; Ursule Mirouet; A Man of Business; The Member for Arcis; The Secrets of a Princess; Cousin Betty; The Unconscious Humorists

Vernisset, Victor de — The Seamy Side of History; Cousin Betty

Vignon, Claude — A Distinguished Provincial at Paris; A Daughter of Eve; Honorine; Cousin Betty; The Unconscious Humorists
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################