The Comte de Fontaine, head of one of the oldest families in Poitou, had served the Bourbon cause with intelligence and bravery during the war in La Vendee against the Republic. Having escaped the dangers that threatened royalist leaders in that stormy period, he would joke, “I am one of the men who gave themselves to be killed on the steps of the throne.” The pleasantry had truth in it, spoken by a man left for dead at the bloody battle of Les Quatre Chemins. Though ruined by confiscation, the staunch Vendeen steadily refused lucrative posts offered by Emperor Napoleon. Immovable in his aristocratic faith, he obeyed its precepts when choosing a companion for life, marrying Mademoiselle de Kergarouet, without fortune but from one of the oldest families in Brittany, despite a rich revolutionary parvenu’s blandishments.

When the second revolution burst on Monsieur de Fontaine he was encumbered with a large family. Though it was not in a nobleman’s views to solicit favors, he yielded to his wife’s wish, left his estate, whose income barely sufficed for the children, and came to Paris. Saddened by the greed of his former comrades in the rush for places under the new Constitution, he was about to return to his property when a ministerial dispatch announced his nomination as marechal de camp, or brigadier-general, under a rule allowing officers of the Catholic armies to count the twenty submerged years of Louis XVIII.’s reign as service. A few days later he received, without solicitation, the crosses of the Legion of Honor and of Saint-Louis.

Shaken by these favors, which he supposed due to the monarch’s remembrance, he no longer contented himself with taking his family, as he had piously done every Sunday, to cry “Vive le Roi” in the hall of the Tuileries when the royal family passed to chapel; he craved a private audience. The audience, granted, was not private. The royal drawing-room was full of old adherents whose powdered heads, seen from above, suggested a carpet of snow. There the Count met old friends who received him somewhat coldly; but the princes he found ADORABLE, an enthusiastic expression which escaped him when the most gracious of his masters, to whom the Count supposed himself known only by name, came to shake hands with him and spoke of him as the most thorough Vendeen of them all. Despite this ovation, none thought to inquire about the sum of his losses or the money he had poured so generously into the Catholic regiments. He discovered, a little late, that he had made war at his own cost. Toward the end of the evening he ventured a witty allusion to the state of his affairs, similar to that of many gentlemen. His Majesty laughed heartily—any speech bearing the hall-mark of wit pleased him—but replied with one of those royal pleasantries whose sweetness is more formidable than anger. One of the King’s intimates approached the fortune-seeking Vendeen and made him understand by a keen, polite hint that the time had not yet come for settling accounts with the sovereign; that there were bills of longer standing on the books which would doubtless remain as part of the history of the Revolution. The Count prudently withdrew from the venerable group; then, disentangling his sword from among the lean legs that had mixed with it, he crossed the Tuileries courtyard and took the hackney cab he had left on the quay. With the restive spirit peculiar to old-school nobility, who still remembered the League and the Barricades of 1588, he bewailed himself in his cab, loudly enough to compromise him, over the change at Court. “Formerly,” he said, “every one could speak freely to the King of his affairs; nobles could ask favors or money when it suited them, and now one cannot recover what one advanced without raising a scandal! By Heaven! the cross of Saint-Louis and the rank of brigadier-general will not make good the three hundred thousand livres I have spent, out and out, on the royal cause. I must speak to the King, face to face, in his own room.”

This scene cooled Monsieur de Fontaine’s ardor all the more because his requests for interview were never answered. He saw upstarts of the Empire obtain offices reserved under the old monarchy for the highest families.

“All is lost!” he exclaimed one morning. “The King has certainly never been other than a revolutionary. But for Monsieur, who never derogates, and is some comfort to his faithful adherents, I do not know what hands the crown of France might not fall into if things go on like this. Their cursed constitutional system is the worst possible government, and can never suit France. Louis XVIII. and Monsieur Beugnot spoiled everything at Saint Ouen.”

The Count, in despair, prepared to retire to his estate, abandoning with dignity all claims to repayment. At this moment the events of 20th March (1815) warned of a fresh storm threatening the legitimate monarch. Monsieur de Fontaine, like one of those generous souls who do not dismiss a servant in a torrent of rain, borrowed on his lands to follow the routed monarchy, uncertain whether this complicity in emigration would prove more propitious than his past devotion. But when he perceived that the companions of the King’s exile were in higher favor than the brave men who had protested, sword in hand, against the republic, he perhaps hoped to derive greater profit from the journey into foreign lands than from dangerous service at home. Nor was his calculation rash. He was, to quote a witty diplomat, one of the faithful five hundred who shared the exile of the Court at Ghent, and one of the fifty thousand who returned with it. During the short banishment of royalty Monsieur de Fontaine was employed by Louis XVIII., and found opportunities to give proofs of political honesty and sincere attachment. One evening, when the King had nothing better to do, he recalled Monsieur de Fontaine’s witticism at the Tuileries. The old Vendeen did not let the chance slip; he told his story with such vivacity that a king who never forgot anything might remember it at a convenient season. The royal amateur of literature also observed the elegant style given to some notes the discreet gentleman had been invited to recast. This little success stamped Monsieur de Fontaine on the King’s memory as one of the Crown’s loyal servants.

At the second Restoration the Count was among special envoys sent through the departments, charged with absolute jurisdiction over leaders of revolt; but he used his powers with moderation. After the temporary commission ended, the High Provost found a seat in the Privy Council, became a deputy, spoke little, listened much, and changed his opinions considerably. Certain circumstances, unknown to historians, brought him into such intimate relations with the Sovereign that one day, as he came in, the shrewd monarch addressed him: “My friend Fontaine, I shall take care never to appoint you to be director-general, or minister. Neither you nor I, as employees, could keep our place on account of our opinions. Representative government has this advantage; it saves Us the trouble We used to have of dismissing Our Secretaries of State. Our Council is a perfect inn-parlor, whither public opinion sometimes sends strange travelers; however, We can always find a place for Our faithful adherents.”

This ironical speech introduced a rescript giving Monsieur de Fontaine an appointment as administrator in the office of Crown lands. Thanks to the intelligent attention with which he listened to his royal friend’s sarcasms, his name always rose to His Majesty’s lips when a commission was to be appointed whose members were to receive a handsome salary. He had the good sense to hold his tongue about the favor, and knew how to entertain the monarch in those familiar chats Louis XVIII. delighted in, as much as in a well-written note, by his brilliant repetition of political anecdotes and the parliamentary tittle-tattle then rife. It is well known he was immensely amused by every detail of his Gouvernementabilite—a word adopted by the facetious Majesty.

Thanks to Comte de Fontaine’s good sense, wit, and tact, every member of his large family, however young, ended, as he jestingly told His Sovereign, by attaching himself like a silkworm to the leaves of the Pay-List. Thus, by the King’s intervention, his eldest son found a high and fixed position as a lawyer. The second, before the Restoration a mere captain, was appointed to command a legion on the return from Ghent; then, thanks to the confusion of 1815, when regulations were evaded, he passed into the bodyguard, returned to a line regiment, and after the affair of the Trocadero was a lieutenant-general with a commission in the Guards. The youngest, appointed sous-préfet, soon became a legal official and director of a municipal board in Paris, safe from legislative changes. These bounties, bestowed without parade and as secret as the favor enjoyed by the Count, fell unperceived. Though father and sons each had sinecures enough to enjoy incomes almost equal to a chief of department, their political good fortune excited no envy. In those early days of the constitutional system, few had precise ideas of the civil service domain, where astute favorites found equivalents for demolished abbeys. Monsieur le Comte de Fontaine, who until lately boasted he had not read the Charter and displayed indignation at courtiers’ greed, had proved to his august master that he understood, as the King did, the spirit and resources of the representative system. At the same time, notwithstanding the established careers open to his three sons and the pecuniary advantages of four official appointments, Monsieur de Fontaine headed too large a family to re-establish his fortune rapidly.

His three sons were rich in prospects, favor, and talent; but he had three daughters, and feared wearing out the monarch’s benevolence. He mentioned them one by one. The King had too much good taste to leave his work incomplete. The marriage of the eldest with a Receiver-General, Planat de Baudry, was arranged by one of those royal speeches that cost nothing and are worth millions. One evening, when the Sovereign was out of spirits, he smiled on hearing of another Demoiselle de Fontaine, for whom he found a husband in a young magistrate of inferior birth, no doubt, but wealthy, and whom he created Baron. When, the year after, the Vendeen spoke of Mademoiselle Emilie de Fontaine, the King replied in his thin sharp tones, “Amicus Plato sed magis amica Natio.” A few days later he treated his “friend Fontaine” to a harmless quatrain, which he styled an epigram, making fun of these three daughters introduced as a trinity. Report said the monarch found the point in the Unity of the three Divine Persons.

“If your Majesty would only condescend to turn the epigram into an epithalamium?” said the Count, trying to turn the sally to good account.

“Though I see the rhyme of it, I fail to see the reason,” retorted the King, who did not relish any pleasantry, however mild, on the subject of his poetry.

From that day his intercourse with Monsieur de Fontaine showed less amenity. Kings enjoy contradicting more than people think. Like most youngest children, Emilie de Fontaine was a Benjamin spoiled by almost everybody. The King’s coolness therefore caused the Count regret, because no marriage was ever so difficult to arrange as that of this darling daughter. To understand the obstacles we must visit the fine residence where the official was housed at the nation’s expense. Emilie had spent childhood on the family estate, enjoying the abundance that suffices for youthful joys; her lightest wishes had been law to her sisters, brothers, mother, and even her father. All her relations doted on her. Having come to discretion just when her family was loaded with fortune’s favors, the enchantment continued. The luxury of Paris seemed to her as natural as fruit or rural plenty. As in childhood she had never been thwarted, so at fourteen she was still obeyed when she rushed into the whirl of fashion.

Accustomed by degrees to money, elegant dress, gilded drawing-rooms, and fine carriages, these pleasures became necessary to her as the compliments of flattery, sincere or false, and the vanities of court life. Like most spoiled children, she tyrannized over those who loved her, and kept blandishments for the indifferent. Her faults grew with her growth, and her parents were to gather bitter fruits of this education. At nineteen Emilie had not yet chosen among many suitors whom her father’s politics brought to his entertainments. Though young, she asserted in society all the freedom of mind a married woman can enjoy. Her beauty was so remarkable that to appear in a room was to be its queen; but, like sovereigns, she had no friends, though she was everywhere the object of attentions to which a finer nature might have succumbed. Not a man, not even an old man, could contradict the opinions of a young girl whose lightest look could rekindle love in the coldest heart.

She had been carefully educated, painted pretty well, spoke Italian and English, and played the piano brilliantly; her voice, trained by the best masters, had a ring that made her singing irresistibly charming. Clever and intimate with literature, she might have made folks believe that, as Mascarille says, people of quality come into the world knowing everything. She could argue on Italian or Flemish painting, on the Middle Ages or the Renaissance; pronounce at haphazard on books new or old, and expose defects with cruelly graceful wit. The simplest thing she said was accepted by an admiring crowd as a fez of the Sultan by the Turks. She thus dazzled shallow persons; as to deeper minds, her tact enabled her to discern them, and for them she put forth so much fascination that, under cover of her charms, she escaped scrutiny. This charming veneer covered a careless heart; the common opinion that no one else dwelt in a sphere lofty enough to understand her merits, and a pride based on birth as well as beauty, governed her. In the absence of the overwhelming sentiment that sooner or later works havoc in a woman’s heart, she spent young ardor in an immoderate love of distinction, and expressed deepest contempt for persons of inferior birth. Supremely impertinent to newly-created nobility, she strove to have her parents recognized as equals by the most illustrious families of the Saint-Germain quarter.

These sentiments did not escape Monsieur de Fontaine, who more than once, when his two elder girls were married, smarted under Emilie’s sarcasm. Logical readers may be surprised to see the old Royalist bestow his eldest daughter on a Receiver-General, indeed of some old hereditary estates, but with no little word to which the throne owed so many partisans, and his second to a magistrate too lately Baronified to obscure that his father had sold firewood. This change in a noble on the verge of sixty—an age when men rarely renounce convictions—was due not merely to residence in modern Babylon, where country folks get their corners rubbed down; the Count’s new political conscience resulted also from the King’s advice and friendship. The philosophical prince had taken pleasure in converting the Vendeen to ideas required by the advance of the nineteenth century and the new aspect of monarchy. Louis XVIII. aimed at fusing parties as Napoleon had fused things and men. The legitimate King, not less clever perhaps than his rival, acted contrariwise. The last head of the Bourbons was eager to satisfy the third estate and creations of the Empire by curbing the clergy, as Napoleon had courted old nobility or endowed the Church. The Privy Councillor, in the secret of these royal projects, had become one of the most prudent and influential leaders of the moderate party desiring fusion in the nation’s interests. He preached the expensive doctrines of constitutional government and lent his weight to the political see-saw enabling his master to rule France amid storms. Perhaps Monsieur de Fontaine hoped that a sudden gust of legislation might carry him to the peerage. One rigid principle was to recognize no nobility in France but that of the peerage—the only families that might enjoy privileges.

“As far from Lafayette’s party as from La Bourdonnaye’s,” he engaged in general reconciliation, which promised a new era and fortunes. He sought to convince families frequenting his drawing-room how few openings would henceforth be offered by civil or military careers. He urged mothers to give boys a start in independent and industrial professions, explaining military posts and high government appointments must at last pertain, in constitutional order, to younger sons of peers. According to him, the people had conquered enough of practical government by an elective assembly and appointments to law-offices and the exchequer, which, he said, would always be the natural right of distinguished men of the third estate.

These new notions and the prudent matches they led to met strong resistance at home. The Comtesse de Fontaine remained faithful to ancient beliefs no woman could disown who, through her mother, belonged to the Rohans. Although she had opposed the happiness and fortune awaiting her two eldest girls, she yielded to private considerations husband and wife confide when their heads rest on the same pillow. Monsieur de Fontaine calmly showed by exact arithmetic that residence in Paris, entertaining, the magnificence of the house replacing privations shared in La Vendee, and the expenses of their sons swallowed most of their salary income. They must therefore seize opportunities offered to settle their girls with wealth. Would they not one day enjoy sixty–eighty–a hundred thousand francs a year? Such matches were rare for girls without portions. It was time to economize, add to the estate of Fontaine, and re-establish territorial fortune. The Countess yielded to such cogent arguments, as any mother would, though perhaps with less grace; but she declared Emilie must marry to satisfy the pride she had helped foster.

Thus events that should have brought joy introduced a leaven of discord. The Receiver-General and the young lawyer were objects of ceremonious formality the Countess and Emilie contrived. This etiquette soon found broader scope; the Lieutenant-General de Fontaine married Mademoiselle Mongenod, daughter of a rich banker; the President found a wife in a young lady whose father, twice or thrice a millionaire, had traded in salt; and the third brother, faithful to plebeian doctrines, married Mademoiselle Grossetete, only daughter of the Receiver-General at Bourges. The sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law found the sphere of political bigwigs and Faubourg Saint-Germain drawing-rooms so charming and advantageous that they formed a little court round overbearing Emilie. This treaty between interest and pride was not, however, so cemented but that the young despot sometimes caused revolts in her realm. Scenes that the highest circles would not have disowned kept up a sarcastic temper among family members; this, without seriously diminishing public regard, sometimes turned private sentiments far from charitable. Thus the Lieutenant-General’s wife, a Baronne, thought herself as noble as a Kergarouet, and imagined her good hundred thousand francs a year gave her the right to be as impertinent as Emilie, whom she sometimes wished happily married, announcing a peer’s daughter had married Monsieur So-and-So with no title. The Vicomtesse de Fontaine amused herself by eclipsing Emilie in taste, magnificence of dress, furniture, and carriages. The satirical spirit in which brothers and sisters received Emilie’s claims roused her to wrath that a hailstorm of sharp sayings could hardly mitigate. So when the head of the family felt a slight chill in the King’s tacit and precarious friendship, he trembled, all the more since, as a result of her sisters’ mockery, his favorite had never looked so high.

In the midst of these circumstances, and when this petty domestic warfare had become serious, the monarch, whose favor Monsieur de Fontaine still hoped to regain, was attacked by the malady of which he was to die. The great political chief, who steered his bark amid tempests, soon succumbed. Certain then of favors to come, the Comte de Fontaine made every effort to gather the elite of marrying men about his youngest daughter. Those who have tried to settle a haughty and capricious girl will understand the trouble taken by the unlucky father. Such an affair, carried out to Emilie’s liking, would worthily crown the decade the Count had followed at Paris. From the way his family claimed salaries under every department, it might be compared with the House of Austria, which by intermarriage threatens to pervade Europe. The old Vendeen was not discouraged in bringing forward suitors, so much had he the daughter’s happiness at heart, but nothing could be more absurd than how the impertinent young thing pronounced verdicts on her adorers. It might have been supposed that, like a princess in the Arabian Nights, Emilie was rich and beautiful enough to choose from all princes. Her objections were each more preposterous than the last: one had too thick knees and was bow-legged, another was short-sighted, this one’s name was Durand, that one limped, and almost all were too fat. Livelier, more attractive, and gayer than ever after dismissing two or three suitors, she rushed into the winter festivities and balls, where her keen eyes criticized the celebrities of the day and delighted in encouraging proposals she invariably rejected.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Nature had given her all the advantages needed for the part of Célimène. Tall and slight, Émilie de Fontaine could assume a dignified or frolicsome mien at will. Her somewhat long neck allowed her to affect graceful attitudes of scorn and impertinence. She had cultivated many turns of the head and feminine gestures that emphasize a smile. Fine black hair and strongly-arched eyebrows lent her countenance an air of pride, which her coquettish instincts and her mirror had taught her to temper with terror by a stare, or gentleness by the softness of her gaze, the curve of her lips, and the coldness or sweetness of her smile. When Émilie meant to conquer a heart, her clear voice had melody; but she could make it sharp and decisive when she wished to silence an indiscreet tongue. Her colorless face and alabaster brow were like a lake that, rippled by a breeze, soon regained serenity. More than one young man, a victim to her scorn, accused her of acting a part; she justified herself by inspiring desire and then subjecting admirers to her most contemptuous caprice. Among fashionable young women, none knew better how to assume reserve when a man of talent was introduced, or to display that insulting politeness which treats an equal as an inferior. Wherever she went she seemed to accept homage rather than compliments; even in a princess her airs would have transformed the chair into an imperial throne.

Monsieur de Fontaine discovered too late how utterly his daughter’s education had been ruined by the tender devotion of the whole family. Early admiration had added to Émilie’s pride and self-confidence. Universal subservience developed the selfishness natural to spoiled children, who, like kings, make playthings of everything that comes to hand. Her graces and talents hid these faults from most, but nothing escaped a good father’s eye, and Monsieur de Fontaine often tried to explain to her the more important pages of life. Vainly. He had to lament his daughter’s capricious indocility and ironical shrewdness too often to persevere in correcting an ill-disposed nature. He contented himself with occasional gentle advice; he had the sorrow of watching his tenderest words slide from her heart as if it were marble. A father’s eyes are slow to be unsealed, and it needed experience before the old Royalist perceived that his daughter’s rare caresses were bestowed with an air of condescension. She was like a child who seems to say to her mother, “Make haste to kiss me, that I may go to play.” In short, Émilie vouchsafed to be fond of her parents. But by sudden whims she often kept aloof and scarcely appeared; she complained of having to share her parents’ hearts with too many people and was jealous even of her brothers and sisters. Then, after creating a desert about her, she accused all nature of her unreal solitude and wilful griefs. Strong in the experience of her twenty years, she blamed fate, not knowing that the mainspring of happiness is in ourselves. She would have fled the planet to escape a marriage like her sisters’, yet was horribly jealous at seeing them married, rich, and happy. Sometimes her mother suspected a touch of madness.

Such aberrations are inexplicable; nothing is commoner than this unconfessed pride in young girls of high families and great beauty. They imagine that mothers, now forty or fifty, cannot sympathize with their young souls and will dress them to eclipse them. Hence secret tears and dumb revolt against supposed tyranny. In the midst of these woes they compose schemes of life and cast their horoscope, taking dreams for reality. In long meditations they decide to give their heart and hand to none but a man with particular qualifications, painting a model to which any future lover must correspond. After some years, by observing the world, those brilliant hues fade, and one day they are astonished to find themselves happy without the nuptial poetry of their day-dreams. It was from such poetry that Mademoiselle Émilie de Fontaine had drawn a programme for suitors. Hence her disdain and sarcasm.

“Though young and of an ancient family, he must be a peer of France,” she told herself. “I could not bear not to see my coat-of-arms on the panels of my carriage, not to drive like princes down the Champs-Élysées on Longchamps days. Besides, my father says that will someday be the highest dignity in France. He must be a soldier—but I reserve the right to make him retire; and he must bear an Order, that the sentries may present arms to us.”

These rare qualifications would count for nothing if he had not amiable temper, a fine figure, intelligence, and, above all, if he were slender. To be lean, a grace which is fugitive under a representative government, was indispensable. Émilie had an ideal standard. A young man who did not fulfil the requisite conditions did not even get a second look.

“Good Heavens! see how fat he is!” was her utmost expression of contempt.

To her, people of respectable corpulence were incapable of sentiment, bad husbands, and unfit for civilized society. Fat seemed a misfortune in a woman; in a man, a crime. These paradoxes were amusing thanks to her lively rhetoric. The Count felt, nevertheless, that his daughter’s affections would become a subject of ridicule, and feared lest her eccentric notions should deviate into bad style. He trembled to think the pitiless world might already be laughing at a young woman who remained so long on the stage without concluding the drama she was playing. More than one suitor, disgusted by refusal, seemed to wait for the slightest misfortune to take revenge. The indifferent were beginning to weary; admiration is exhausting. The old Vendéen knew better than any one that while there is an art in choosing the right moment to appear on the world’s boards, it is harder to quit them in time. So during the first winter after Charles X.’s accession he redoubled efforts, seconded by his sons and sons-in-law, to assemble in his official rooms the best matches Paris and the departments could offer. The splendour of his entertainments and dinners, fragrant with truffles, rivalled the banquets by which ministers secured votes.

The Honorable Deputy was pointed at as an influential corrupter of legislative honesty. A whimsical result: his efforts to get his daughter married secured him splendid popularity. Certain mocking Liberals accused him of selling truffles twice over, but the Poitevin gentleman was so noble and honorable that he was not the subject of those epigrams hurled at the centre votes, the Ministers, the Directors-General, and the official supporters of the Villele Ministry.

After this campaign, during which the Count had brought out all his forces, he believed this time the procession of suitors would not be a dissolving view in his daughter’s eyes. He felt an inward satisfaction at having fulfilled his duty. Having left no stone unturned, he hoped among so many hearts laid at Émilie’s feet there might be one to which her caprice would give a preference. Incapable of repeating such effort, tired of his daughter’s conduct, one morning toward the end of Lent, when the Chamber’s business did not demand his vote, he determined to ask her views. While his valet was powdering his bald head, the Count told him to desire the haughty damsel to appear.

“Joseph,” he added while dressing, “air the room, draw back the curtains, put those chairs straight, lay the rug neat. Dust and open the window.”

The Count multiplied orders. The old servant, understanding his master’s intention, tidied the study, gave order to the chaos of bills, letter-boxes, books, and furniture, and set forward things to please the eye. He admired his handiwork and went.

The anxious sinecure-holder did not share Joseph’s favorable opinion. Before seating himself in his deep chair, which screened him from draughts, he looked round doubtfully, straightened his dressing-gown, wiped his nose, made the fire, pulled up his slippers, restored his little queue of hair, swept the hearth ashes, and examined the room once more, hoping nothing could give occasion to the saucy remarks with which his daughter answered his advice. He was anxious not to compromise his dignity as a father. He took a pinch of snuff, cleared his throat, and then heard his daughter’s light step; she came humming an air from Il Barbiere.

“Good-morning, papa. What do you want with me so early?” she sang, kissing the Count, but with the light carelessness of a mistress confident of pleasing.

“My dear child,” said Monsieur de Fontaine gravely, “I sent for you to talk seriously about your future. You must make such a choice of husband as may secure durable happiness—”

“My good father,” Émilie interrupted in a coaxing tone, “it strikes me the armistice on which we agreed as to my suitors is not yet expired.”

“Émilie, we must to-day forbear from jesting on so important a matter. For some time past the efforts of those who most truly love you have been concentrated on settling you suitably; you would be guilty of ingratitude in meeting with levity proofs of kindness lavished on you.”

Émilie brought forward an armchair, set it by the fireplace to sit facing him, and settled in mocking solemnity, crossing her arms over the frills of a pelerine à la neige, ruthlessly crushing its tulle. After a laughing side glance at her father’s troubled face, she broke silence.

“I never heard you say, my dear father, that the Government issued its instructions in its dressing-gown. However,” she smiled, “that does not matter; the mob are probably not particular. Now, what are your proposals for legislation, and your official introductions?”

“I shall not always be able to make them, headstrong girl!—Listen, Émilie. I intend no longer to compromise my reputation, which is part of my children’s fortune, by recruiting the regiment of dancers which, spring after spring, you put to rout. You have already caused dangerous misunderstandings with certain families. I hope to make you perceive the difficulties of your position and ours. You are twenty-two, my dear, and you should have been married nearly three years. Your brothers and two sisters are richly and happily provided for. But the expenses occasioned by these marriages and your mother’s required style of housekeeping have so reduced our income that I can hardly promise you a hundred thousand francs as a marriage portion. From this day I shall think only of providing for your mother. If I were taken from my family, Madame de Fontaine could not be left at anybody’s mercy. You see, my child, that the amount of your fortune bears no relation to your notions of grandeur. Even that would be a sacrifice I have not hitherto made for either child; but they have agreed not to expect future compensation for an over-favored sister.”

“In their position!” said Émilie, tossing her head.

“My dear, do not depreciate those who love you. Only the poor are generous as a rule; the rich have always reasons for not handing over twenty thousand francs to a relation. Come, do not pout, let us talk rationally.—Among the young marrying men have you noticed Monsieur de Manerville?”

“Oh, he minces his words—he says Zules instead of Jules; he is always looking at his feet because he thinks them small, and he gazes at himself in the glass! Besides, he is fair. I don’t like fair men.”

“Well, then, Monsieur de Beaudenord?”

“He is not noble! he is ill made and stout. He is dark, it is true.—If the two gentlemen could agree to combine their fortunes, and the first would give his name and figure to the second, who should keep his dark hair, then—perhaps—”

“What can you say against Monsieur de Rastignac?”

“Madame de Nucingen has made a banker of him,” she said meaningly.

“And our cousin, the Vicomte de Portenduère?”

“A mere boy, who dances badly; besides, he has no fortune. After all, papa, none of these people have titles. I want, at least, to be a countess like my mother.”

“Have you seen no one, then, this winter—”

“No, papa.”

“What then do you want?”

“The son of a peer of France.”

“My dear girl, you are mad!” said Monsieur de Fontaine, rising. But he suddenly lifted his eyes to heaven, and seemed to find resignation in a religious thought; then, with pity at his daughter who was moved, he took her hand and said: “God is my witness, poor mistaken child, I have conscientiously discharged my duty to you as a father—conscientiously, do I say? Most lovingly, my Émilie. This winter I have brought before you more than one good man, whose character, habits, and temper were known, and all seemed worthy of you. My task is done. From this day thou art the arbiter of thy fate, and I consider myself both happy and unhappy to be relieved of the heaviest of paternal functions. I know not whether you will long hear a voice which to you has never been stern; but remember conjugal happiness rests not so much on brilliant qualities and ample fortune as on reciprocal esteem. This happiness is modest, devoid of show. So now, my dear, my consent is given beforehand, whoever the son-in-law you introduce; but if you are unhappy, remember you will have no right to accuse your father. I will help you, but your choice must be serious and final. I will never again compromise the respect due to my white hairs.”

The affection thus expressed touched Émilie deeply, but she concealed her emotion, seated herself on her father’s knees—he had drooped into his chair again—caressed him fondly, and coaxed him until his brow cleared. As soon as she thought him over his agitation, she said gently: “I thank you for your graceful attention, dear father. You had your room set in order to receive your beloved daughter. You perhaps did not know you would find her so foolish and headstrong. But, papa, is it so difficult to get married to a peer of France? You declared they were manufactured by dozens. At least you will not refuse to advise me.”

“No, my poor child, no,—and I may have occasion more than once to cry ‘Beware!’ Remember that making peers is so recent that they have no great fortunes. Those who are rich look to becoming richer. The wealthiest of our peerage has not half the income of the least rich lord in the English Upper Chamber. Thus French peers are on the lookout for great heiresses. The necessity to marry for money will exist for at least two centuries.

“Pending such a fortunate accident as you long for—this fastidiousness may cost you the best years of your life—your attractions might work a miracle, for men often marry for love now. When experience lurks behind so sweet a face it may achieve wonders. In the first place, have you not the gift of recognizing virtue in the size and shape of a man’s body? This is no small matter! To so wise a young person as you are, I need not enlarge on the difficulties. I am sure you would never attribute good sense to a stranger because he had a handsome face or all the virtues because he had a fine figure. And I agree that sons of peers ought to have an air peculiar to themselves. Though no external sign now stamps a man of rank, those young men may have the indefinable something to reveal it. You have your heart well in hand, like a good horseman sure his steed cannot bolt. Luck be with you, my dear!”

“You are making game of me, papa. Well, I assure you I would rather die in Mlle de Condé’s convent than not be the wife of a peer of France.”

She slipped from his knees proud to be mistress of her fate, and went off singing an air from Il Matrimonio Segreto.

That day the family were keeping an anniversary fête. At dessert Madame Planat, the Receiver-General’s wife, spoke with enthusiasm of a young American of immense fortune who had passionately proposed to her sister.

“A banker, I think,” observed Émilie carelessly. “I do not like money dealers.”

“But, Émilie,” said the Baron de Villaine, husband of the Count’s second daughter, “you do not like lawyers either; so if you refuse men of wealth without titles, I do not see where you will find a husband.”

“Especially, Émilie, with your standard of slimness,” added the Lieutenant-General.

“I know what I want,” replied the young lady.

“My sister wants a fine name, a fine young man, prospects, and a hundred thousand francs a year,” said the Baronne de Fontaine. “Monsieur de Marsay, for instance.”

“I know, my dear,” retorted Émilie, “I do not mean to make such a foolish marriage as some I have seen. Moreover, to end these matrimonial discussions, I hereby declare I shall look on anyone who talks to me of marriage as an enemy to my peace.”

Her uncle, a vice-admiral of seventy whose fortune had risen by twenty thousand francs a year thanks to the Act of Indemnity, feeling privileged to say hard things to his grand-niece, exclaimed:

“Do not tease my poor little Émilie; don’t you see she is waiting till the Duc de Bordeaux comes of age!”

The pleasantry drew general laughter.

“Take care I don’t marry you, old fool!” replied Émilie, her last words drowned in the noise.

“My dear children,” said Madame de Fontaine to soften the saucy retort, “Émilie, like you, will take no advice but her mother’s.”

“Bless me! I shall take no advice but my own in a matter which concerns no one but myself,” said Mademoiselle de Fontaine distinctly.

All eyes turned to the head of the family. The venerable gentleman enjoyed much consideration; happier than many fathers, he was appreciated by his family for the solid qualities by which he had made their fortunes. Hence he was treated with the deep respect shown to living representatives of an ancient pedigree. Silence fell as guests looked from the spoilt girl’s proud pout to Monsieur and Madame de Fontaine’s severe faces.

“I have made my daughter Émilie mistress of her own fate,” the Count replied in a deep voice.

Relations and guests gazed with curiosity and pity. The words declared that fatherly affection was weary of contest with an incorrigible character. Sons-in-law muttered; brothers glanced at their wives with mocking smiles. From that moment every one ceased to take interest in the haughty girl’s prospects. Her old uncle alone ventured to stand on her tack and take broadsides without returning fire.

When fine weather came and the budget was voted, the whole family—an example of parliamentary families with footing in every department—flew away to Aulnay, Antony, and Châtenay. The Receiver-General had bought a country-house there for his wife. Though Émilie despised the commonalty, she was not so carried as to scorn the advantages of fortune acquired in a profession; so she accompanied her sister to the villa, less from affection than because fashion ordained leaving Paris in summer. The green seclusion of Sceaux answered perfectly the requirements of good style and an official position.

Since the fame of the “Bal de Sceaux” may be unknown beyond the Department of the Seine, a brief account is necessary. The environs of Sceaux have a reputation for charming scenery. Perhaps the fame owes partly to Parisians’ hunger for green; yet artists, foreigners, and many pretty women confirm it. In the midst of a garden stands a large rotunda open on all sides with a roof on elegant pillars sheltering a dancing-floor. The most stuck-up landowners sometimes make excursions there in dashing parties or elegant carriages, hoping to meet women of fashion or to be seen by them—and to gaze at peasant girls, as wily as judges. The rotunda’s ballroom is crowded with the town’s shop clerks, medical disciples, and other youths, and many bourgeois marriages have begun to the band’s sound. If that roof could speak, what love-stories it would tell!

This medley gave the Sceaux balls a spice of amusement beyond similar places near Paris; the rotunda and the beauty of its gardens were undeniable attractions. Émilie was the first to wish to play at being common folk at this rural entertainment and promised herself immense pleasure in mingling with the crowd. Everybody wondered, but is there not a keen pleasure to grand people in an incognito? Émilie amused herself by imagining the town-bred figures; she fancied leaving a bewitching glance on shopkeepers’ hearts, laughed at the damsels’ airs, and sharpened pencils for the scenes she would sketch in her satirical album. Sunday could not come soon enough.

The Villa Planat party set out on foot, so as not to betray the rank of those attending the ball. They dined early. May favored this aristocratic escapade with one of its finest evenings. Émilie was surprised to find quadrilles that seemed upper-class, with some young men who looked as though they had saved for a month to shine for a day; she perceived several couples whose hearty glee suggested nothing conjugal. She saw that pleasure in cotton was much like pleasure in satin; middle-class girls danced as well as ladies, sometimes better. Most women were simply and suitably dressed. Country folk kept politely apart. Émilie studied the mixture for satire but had not time for many remarks before she found a flower in this wide field—one figure whose splendor and coloring fascinated her.

Seated on a clumsy chair at the edge of the circular floor, she treated the living groups as a picture gallery, turning her eye-glass on people two yards away, remarking as if criticising a study. Her eye was caught by a figure placed as if to be painted, in the best light, out of proportion with the rest.

The stranger, alone and absorbed, leaned against a column; his arms were folded and his posture elegant and unaffected. He had half turned his head and bent it a little, but without pose. His gaze followed a dancer, betraying feeling. His slender, easy frame recalled noble proportions; fine black hair curled over a high forehead. Émilie observed that his linen was fine, his gloves fresh, his feet small and well shod in Irish kid boots. He had none of the trinkets of National Guard dandies. A black ribbon, to which an eye-glass was attached, hung over a fashionable waistcoat. Long, curled lashes shaded his eyes. Melancholy and passion expressed themselves in the face; the olive complexion and a mouth ready to smile added a pathetic grace. There was too much promise to say simply “What a handsome man!” One wanted to know him. Any clear-sighted observer would take him for a clever man attracted to this rural festivity by some motive.

All these observations cost Émilie only a minute, during which the gentleman became the object of her secret admiration. She did not yet think “He must be a peer!” but “Oh, if only he is noble—” Without finishing the thought, she rose and, followed by her brother the General, made her way toward the column, feigning to watch the quadrille, but by a woman’s stratagem she did not lose a gesture. The stranger politely moved to make way and leaned against another pillar. Émilie, nettled by his politeness as she might by impertinence, began talking to her brother louder than taste enjoined; she tossed her head, gesticulated, and laughed for no reason, less to amuse him than to attract the stranger. None of her arts succeeded. She followed the direction of his eyes and discovered the cause of his indifference.

In the quadrille, a pale girl was dancing whose face recalled Girodet’s divinities in his Ossian composition. Émilie fancied she recognized her as a distinguished milady living on a neighbouring estate. Her partner was a lad of fifteen, with red hands, in nankeen trousers and a blue coat. His appearance showed the dancer’s love of dancing made her easy about partners. Her movements did not betray fragility, but a faint flush tinged her cheeks. Émilie went nearer to examine the girl when she returned to her place. The stranger went up to the pretty dancer and, leaning over, said in a gentle but commanding tone:

“Clara, my child, do not dance any more.”

Clara pouted, bowed her head, and finally smiled. When the dance was over, the young man wrapped her in a cashmere shawl with lover’s care and seated her sheltered from the wind. Soon Émilie saw them rise and walk round as if preparing to leave, and she followed under pretence of admiring the garden views. Her brother lent himself with malicious good-humour to her divagations. Émilie watched the couple get into an elegant tilbury, by which stood a groom in livery. As the young man from his high seat drew the reins, she caught a glance from his eye such as a man casts aimlessly at the crowd; then she enjoyed the feeble pleasure of seeing him turn to look at her. The young lady did the same. Was it jealousy?

“I imagine you have now seen enough of the garden,” said her brother. “We may go back to the dancing.”

“I am ready,” said she. “Do you think the girl can be a relation of Lady Dudley’s?”

“Lady Dudley may have some male relation staying with her,” said the Baron; “but a young girl—No!”

Next day Émilie expressed a wish to ride. She gradually accustomed her uncle and brothers to early rides, which she declared excellent for health. She fancied the environs of the hamlet where Lady Dudley was living. Despite her cavalry manoeuvres, she did not meet the stranger as soon as she hoped. She went several times to the Bal de Sceaux without seeing the Englishman who had fallen into her dreams. Though obstacles often quicken passion, there was a time when Émilie nearly gave up the search. She might have wandered long without meeting him; Clara was not English, and the man escorting her did not dwell in Châtenay.

One evening riding with her uncle, who during fine weather had a truce from gout, she met Lady Dudley in an open carriage with Monsieur Vandenesse. Émilie recognized them, and her suppositions were dissipated. Annoyed, she touched up her horse so suddenly her uncle had difficulty following.

“I am too old, it seems, to understand youthful spirits,” said the old sailor, cantering. “What ails my niece? Now she walks at a foot-pace like a gendarme. One might fancy she wanted to outflank that worthy man who looks to me like an author with a notebook. My word, I am a great simpleton! Is not that the very young man we seek?”

At this thought the Comte de Kergarouet moderated his horse to follow without noise. He had played many pranks in earlier years when gallantry was honoured and guessed at once that by chance Émilie had met the Unknown of Sceaux. Despite age, the Count recognized signs of extreme agitation in his niece. “Ay, that’s it,” he thought. “She is following him as a pirate follows a merchantman. When she loses sight of him she will be in despair at not knowing whether he is a marquis or a shopkeeper. These young heads need an old fogy like me...”

He suddenly spurred so as to come between her and the young man, forcing the latter onto the grassy bank. Drawing up, the Count exclaimed:

“Couldn’t you get out of the way?”

“I beg your pardon, monsieur. But I did not know it lay with me to apologize because you almost rode me down.”

“There, enough of that, my good fellow!” the sailor replied harshly, touching the young man’s shoulder. “A liberal citizen is a reasoner; every reasoner should be prudent.”

The young man went up the bankside, crossed his arms, and said excitedly, “I cannot suppose, monsieur, as I look at your white hairs, that you still amuse yourself by provoking duels—”

“White hairs!” cried the sailor. “You lie in your throat. They are only gray.”

The quarrel quickly became fierce; the younger man forgot moderation. As the Comte de Kergarouet saw his niece returning in uneasiness, he told the antagonist his name and bade him keep silence before the young lady. The stranger could not help smiling as he gave a visiting card to the old man, saying he lived at a country-house at Chevreuse; then he hurried away.

“You very nearly damaged that poor young counter-jumper, my dear,” the Count said to Émilie. “Do you not know how to hold your horse? You leave me to compromise my dignity to screen your folly; whereas if you had stopped, one of your looks or pretty speeches—one of those you can make so prettily when not pert—would have set everything right.”

“But, my dear uncle, it was your horse, not mine, which caused the accident. I think you can no longer ride; you are not so good as last year. Instead of talking nonsense—”

“Nonsense, by Gad! Is it nothing to be impertinent to your uncle?”

“Ought we not to go and inquire if the young man is hurt? He is limping—look!”

“No, he is running; I rated him soundly.”

“Oh, yes, uncle; I know you there!”

“Stop,” said the Count, pulling Émilie’s horse by the bridle, “I do not see the necessity of making advances to some shopkeeper who is only too lucky to have been thrown down by a charming young lady, or the commander of La Belle-Poule.”

“Why think him common, uncle? He seems to me to have fine manners.”

“Everyone has manners nowadays, my dear.”

“No, uncle, not everyone has the air and style of drawing-rooms. I’ll bet he is of noble birth.”

“You had not long to study him.”

“No, but it is not the first time I have seen him.”

“Nor is it the first time you have looked for him,” laughed the admiral.

Émilie coloured. Her uncle amused himself with her embarrassment; then he said: “Émilie, you know I love you as my own child, precisely because you are of high birth. Who could have believed sound principles would become so rare? Well, I will be your confidant. I see he is not indifferent to you. Hush! The family would laugh if we sailed under the wrong flag. We two will keep our secret, and I promise to bring him into the drawing-room.”

“When, uncle?”

“To-morrow.”

“But, my dear uncle, I am not committed to anything?”

“Nothing whatever, and you may bombard him, set fire to him, and leave him to founder if you choose. He won’t be the first, I fancy?”

“You ARE kind, uncle!”

At home the Count put on his glasses, quietly took the card from his pocket, and read: “Maximilien Longueville, Rue de Sentier.”

“Make yourself happy, my dear niece,” he said, “you may hook him with easy conscience; he belongs to a historical family, and if he is not a peer of France, he infallibly will be.”

“How do you know so much?”

“That is my secret.”

“Then do you know his name?”

The old man bowed his gray head like a gnarled oak with a few leaves fluttering, and Émilie began to try her coquettish arts. Long familiar with cajoling her uncle, she lavished childlike caresses and tender names; she even kissed him to induce him to divulge the secret. The old man, who often paid for these scenes with presents or opera boxes, amused himself with her entreaties. As he spun out the pleasure too long, Émilie grew angry, sulked, then, urged by curiosity, recovered. The admiral extracted a solemn promise that she would be gentler, less noisy, less wilful, spend less, and tell him everything. The treaty signed by a kiss on Émilie’s brow, he led her into a corner, drew her on his knee, held the card under his thumbs to hide it, then uncovered the letters and spelled Longueville; but he firmly refused to show anything more.

This incident intensified Émilie’s secret sentiment. During most of that night she evolved brilliant pictures from dreams about the imagined wealth gilding her married life. Thanks to chance, she could now see something very unlike a chimera at the fountain-head of her imaginary fortune. Ignorant, as young girls are, of the perils of love and marriage, she was passionately captivated by their externals. This birth of feeling—sweet but cruel—was like other youthful mistakes that exert fatal influence on the lives of inexperienced girls who trust only their judgment to provide for future happiness.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Next morning, before Emilie was awake, her uncle had hastened to Chevreuse. On recognizing, in the courtyard of an elegant little villa, the young man he had so determinedly insulted the day before, he went up to him with the pressing politeness of men of the old court.

“Why, my dear sir, who could have guessed that I should have a brush, at the age of seventy-three, with the son, or the grandson, of one of my best friends. I am a vice-admiral, monsieur; is not that as much as to say that I think no more of fighting a duel than of smoking a cigar? Why, in my time, no two young men could be intimate till they had seen the color of their blood! But ‘sdeath, sir, last evening, sailor-like, I had taken a drop too much grog on board, and I ran you down. Shake hands; I would rather take a hundred rebuffs from a Longueville than cause his family the smallest regret.”

However coldly the young man tried to behave to the Comte de Kergarouet, he could not resist the frank cordiality of his manner, and presently gave him his hand.

“You were going out riding,” said the Count. “Do not let me detain you. But, unless you have other plans, I beg you will come to dinner to-day at the Villa Planat. My nephew, the Comte de Fontaine, is a man it is essential that you should know. Ah, ha! And I propose to make up to you for my clumsiness by introducing you to five of the prettiest women in Paris. So, so, young man, your brow is clearing! I am fond of young people, and I like to see them happy. Their happiness reminds me of the good times of my youth, when adventures were not lacking, any more than duels. We were gay dogs then! Nowadays you think and worry over everything, as though there had never been a fifteenth and a sixteenth century.”

“But, monsieur, are we not in the right? The sixteenth century only gave religious liberty to Europe, and the nineteenth will give it political lib----”

“Oh, we will not talk politics. I am a perfect old woman--ultra you see. But I do not hinder young men from being revolutionary, so long as they leave the King at liberty to disperse their assemblies.”

When they had gone a little way, and the Count and his companion were in the heart of the woods, the old sailor pointed out a slender young birch sapling, pulled up his horse, took out one of his pistols, and the bullet was lodged in the heart of the tree, fifteen paces away.

“You see, my dear fellow, that I am not afraid of a duel,” he said with comical gravity, as he looked at Monsieur Longueville.

“Nor am I,” replied the young man, promptly cocking his pistol; he aimed at the hole made by the Comte’s bullet, and sent his own close to it.

“That is what I call a well-educated man,” cried the admiral with enthusiasm.

During this ride with the youth, whom he already regarded as his nephew, he found endless opportunities of catechizing him on all the trifles of which a perfect knowledge constituted, according to his private code, an accomplished gentleman.

“Have you any debts?” he at last asked of his companion, after many other inquiries.

“No, monsieur.”

“What, you pay for all you have?”

“Punctually; otherwise we should lose our credit, and every sort of respect.”

“But at least you have more than one mistress? Ah, you blush, comrade! Well, manners have changed. All these notions of lawful order, Kantism, and liberty have spoilt the young men. You have no Guimard now, no Duthe, no creditors--and you know nothing of heraldry; why, my dear young friend, you are not fully fledged. The man who does not sow his wild oats in the spring sows them in the winter. If I have but eighty thousand francs a year at the age of seventy, it is because I ran through the capital at thirty. Oh! with my wife--in decency and honor. However, your imperfections will not interfere with my introducing you at the Pavillon Planat. Remember, you have promised to come, and I shall expect you.”

“What an odd little old man!” said Longueville to himself. “He is so jolly and hale; but though he wishes to seem a good fellow, I will not trust him too far.”

Next day, at about four o’clock, when the house party were dispersed in the drawing-rooms and billiard-room, a servant announced to the inhabitants of the Villa Planat, “Monsieur DE Longueville.” On hearing the name of the old admiral’s protege, every one, down to the player who was about to miss his stroke, rushed in, as much to study Mademoiselle de Fontaine’s countenance as to judge of this phoenix of men, who had earned honorable mention to the detriment of so many rivals. A simple but elegant style of dress, an air of perfect ease, polite manners, a pleasant voice with a ring in it which found a response in the hearer’s heart-strings, won the good-will of the family for Monsieur Longueville. He did not seem unaccustomed to the luxury of the Receiver-General’s ostentatious mansion. Though his conversation was that of a man of the world, it was easy to discern that he had had a brilliant education, and that his knowledge was as thorough as it was extensive. He knew so well the right thing to say in a discussion on naval architecture, trivial, it is true, started by the old admiral, that one of the ladies remarked that he must have passed through the Ecole Polytechnique.

“And I think, madame,” he replied, “that I may regard it as an honor to have got in.”

In spite of urgent pressing, he refused politely but firmly to be kept to dinner, and put an end to the persistency of the ladies by saying that he was the Hippocrates of his young sister, whose delicate health required great care.

“Monsieur is perhaps a medical man?” asked one of Emilie’s sisters-in-law with ironical meaning.

“Monsieur has left the Ecole Polytechnique,” Mademoiselle de Fontaine kindly put in; her face had flushed with richer color, as she learned that the young lady of the ball was Monsieur Longueville’s sister.

“But, my dear, he may be a doctor and yet have been to the Ecole Polytechnique--is it not so, monsieur?”

“There is nothing to prevent it, madame,” replied the young man.

Every eye was on Emilie, who was gazing with uneasy curiosity at the fascinating stranger. She breathed more freely when he added, not without a smile, “I have not the honor of belonging to the medical profession; and I even gave up going into the Engineers in order to preserve my independence.”

“And you did well,” said the Count. “But how can you regard it as an honor to be a doctor?” added the Breton nobleman. “Ah, my young friend, such a man as you----”

“Monsieur le Comte, I respect every profession that has a useful purpose.”

“Well, in that we agree. You respect those professions, I imagine, as a young man respects a dowager.”

Monsieur Longueville made his visit neither too long nor too short. He left at the moment when he saw that he had pleased everybody, and that each one’s curiosity about him had been roused.

“He is a cunning rascal!” said the Count, coming into the drawing-room after seeing him to the door.

Mademoiselle de Fontaine, who had been in the secret of this call, had dressed with some care to attract the young man’s eye; but she had the little disappointment of finding that he did not bestow on her so much attention as she thought she deserved. The family were a good deal surprised at the silence into which she had retired. Emilie generally displayed all her arts for the benefit of newcomers, her witty prattle, and the inexhaustible eloquence of her eyes and attitudes. Whether it was that the young man’s pleasing voice and attractive manners had charmed her, that she was seriously in love, and that this feeling had worked a change in her, her demeanor had lost all its affectations. Being simple and natural, she must, no doubt, have seemed more beautiful. Some of her sisters, and an old lady, a friend of the family, saw in this behavior a refinement of art. They supposed that Emilie, judging the man worthy of her, intended to delay revealing her merits, so as to dazzle him suddenly when she found that she pleased him. Every member of the family was curious to know what this capricious creature thought of the stranger; but when, during dinner, every one chose to endow Monsieur Longueville with some fresh quality which no one else had discovered, Mademoiselle de Fontaine sat for some time in silence. A sarcastic remark of her uncle’s suddenly roused her from her apathy; she said, somewhat epigrammatically, that such heavenly perfection must cover some great defect, and that she would take good care how she judged so gifted a man at first sight.

“Those who please everybody, please nobody,” she added; “and the worst of all faults is to have none.”

Like all girls who are in love, Emilie cherished the hope of being able to hide her feelings at the bottom of her heart by putting the Argus-eyes that watched on the wrong tack; but by the end of a fortnight there was not a member of the large family party who was not in this little domestic secret. When Monsieur Longueville called for the third time, Emilie believed it was chiefly for her sake. This discovery gave her such intoxicating pleasure that she was startled as she reflected on it. There was something in it very painful to her pride. Accustomed as she was to be the centre of her world, she was obliged to recognize a force that attracted her outside herself; she tried to resist, but she could not chase from her heart the fascinating image of the young man.

Then came some anxiety. Two of Monsieur Longueville’s qualities, very adverse to general curiosity, and especially to Mademoiselle de Fontaine’s, were unexpected modesty and discretion. He never spoke of himself, of his pursuits, or of his family. The hints Emilie threw out in conversation, and the traps she laid to extract from the young fellow some facts concerning himself, he could evade with the adroitness of a diplomatist concealing a secret. If she talked of painting, he responded as a connoisseur; if she sat down to play, he showed without conceit that he was a very good pianist; one evening he delighted all the party by joining his delightful voice to Emilie’s in one of Cimarosa’s charming duets. But when they tried to find out whether he were a professional singer, he baffled them so pleasantly that he did not afford these women, practised as they were in the art of reading feelings, the least chance of discovering to what social sphere he belonged. However boldly the old uncle cast the boarding-hooks over the vessel, Longueville slipped away cleverly, so as to preserve the charm of mystery; and it was easy to him to remain the “handsome Stranger” at the Villa, because curiosity never overstepped the bounds of good breeding.

Emilie, distracted by this reserve, hoped to get more out of the sister than the brother, in the form of confidences. Aided by her uncle, who was as skilful in such manoeuvres as in handling a ship, she endeavored to bring upon the scene the hitherto unseen figure of Mademoiselle Clara Longueville. The family party at the Villa Planat soon expressed the greatest desire to make the acquaintance of so amiable a young lady, and to give her some amusement. An informal dance was proposed and accepted. The ladies did not despair of making a young girl of sixteen talk.

Notwithstanding the little clouds piled up by suspicion and created by curiosity, a light of joy shone in Emilie’s soul, for she found life delicious when thus intimately connected with another than herself. She began to understand the relations of life. Whether it is that happiness makes us better, or that she was too fully occupied to torment other people, she became less caustic, more gentle, and indulgent. This change in her temper enchanted and amazed her family. Perhaps, at last, her selfishness was being transformed to love. It was a deep delight to her to look for the arrival of her bashful and unconfessed adorer. Though they had not uttered a word of passion, she knew that she was loved, and with what art did she not lead the stranger to unlock the stores of his information, which proved to be varied! She perceived that she, too, was being studied, and that made her endeavor to remedy the defects her education had encouraged. Was not this her first homage to love, and a bitter reproach to herself? She desired to please, and she was enchanting; she loved, and she was idolized. Her family, knowing that her pride would sufficiently protect her, gave her enough freedom to enjoy the little childish delights which give to first love its charm and its violence. More than once the young man and Mademoiselle de Fontaine walked, tete-a-tete, in the avenues of the garden, where nature was dressed like a woman going to a ball. More than once they had those conversations, aimless and meaningless, in which the emptiest phrases are those which cover the deepest feelings. They often admired together the setting sun and its gorgeous coloring. They gathered daisies to pull the petals off, and sang the most impassioned duets, using the notes set down by Pergolesi or Rossini as faithful interpreters to express their secrets.

The day of the dance came. Clara Longueville and her brother, whom the servants persisted in honoring with the noble DE, were the principle guests. For the first time in her life Mademoiselle de Fontaine felt pleasure in a young girl’s triumph. She lavished on Clara in all sincerity the gracious petting and little attentions which women generally give each other only to excite the jealousy of men. Emilie, had, indeed, an object in view; she wanted to discover some secrets. But, being a girl, Mademoiselle Longueville showed even more mother-wit than her brother, for she did not even look as if she were hiding a secret, and kept the conversation to subjects unconnected with personal interests, while, at the same time, she gave it so much charm that Mademoiselle de Fontaine was almost envious, and called her “the Siren.” Though Emilie had intended to make Clara talk, it was Clara, in fact, who questioned Emilie; she had meant to judge her, and she was judged by her; she was constantly provoked to find that she had betrayed her own character in some reply which Clara had extracted from her, while her modest and candid manner prohibited any suspicion of perfidy. There was a moment when Mademoiselle de Fontaine seemed sorry for an ill-judged sally against the commonalty to which Clara had led her.

“Mademoiselle,” said the sweet child, “I have heard so much of you from Maximilien that I had the keenest desire to know you, out of affection for him; but is not a wish to know you a wish to love you?”

“My dear Clara, I feared I might have displeased you by speaking thus of people who are not of noble birth.”

“Oh, be quite easy. That sort of discussion is pointless in these days. As for me, it does not affect me. I am beside the question.”

Ambitious as the answer might seem, it filled Mademoiselle de Fontaine with the deepest joy; for, like all infatuated people, she explained it, as oracles are explained, in the sense that harmonized with her wishes; she began dancing again in higher spirits than ever, as she watched Longueville, whose figure and grace almost surpassed those of her imaginary ideal. She felt added satisfaction in believing him to be well born, her black eyes sparkled, and she danced with all the pleasure that comes of dancing in the presence of the being we love. The couple had never understood each other as well as at this moment; more than once they felt their finger tips thrill and tremble as they were married in the figures of the dance.

The early autumn had come to the handsome pair, in the midst of country festivities and pleasures; they had abandoned themselves softly to the tide of the sweetest sentiment in life, strengthening it by a thousand little incidents which any one can imagine; for love is in some respects always the same. They studied each other through it all, as much as lovers can.

“Well, well; a flirtation never turned so quickly into a love match,” said the old uncle, who kept an eye on the two young people as a naturalist watches an insect in the microscope.

The speech alarmed Monsieur and Madame Fontaine. The old Vendeen had ceased to be so indifferent to his daughter’s prospects as he had promised to be. He went to Paris to seek information, and found none. Uneasy at this mystery, and not yet knowing what might be the outcome of the inquiry which he had begged a Paris friend to institute with reference to the family of Longueville, he thought it his duty to warn his daughter to behave prudently. The fatherly admonition was received with mock submission spiced with irony.

“At least, my dear Emilie, if you love him, do not own it to him.”

“My dear father, I certainly do love him; but I will await your permission before I tell him so.”

“But remember, Emilie, you know nothing of his family or his pursuits.”

“I may be ignorant, but I am content to be. But, father, you wished to see me married; you left me at liberty to make my choice; my choice is irrevocably made--what more is needful?”

“It is needful to ascertain, my dear, whether the man of your choice is the son of a peer of France,” the venerable gentleman retorted sarcastically.

Emilie was silent for a moment. She presently raised her head, looked at her father, and said somewhat anxiously, “Are not the Longuevilles----?”

“They became extinct in the person of the old Duc de Rostein-Limbourg, who perished on the scaffold in 1793. He was the last representative of the last and younger branch.”

“But, papa, there are some very good families descended from bastards. The history of France swarms with princes bearing the bar sinister on their shields.”

“Your ideas are much changed,” said the old man, with a smile.

The following day was the last that the Fontaine family were to spend at the Pavillon Planat. Emilie, greatly disturbed by her father’s warning, awaited with extreme impatience the hour at which young Longueville was in the habit of coming, to wring some explanation from him. She went out after dinner, and walked alone across the shrubbery towards an arbor fit for lovers, where she knew that the eager youth would seek her; and as she hastened thither she considered of the best way to discover so important a matter without compromising herself--a rather difficult thing! Hitherto no direct avowal had sanctioned the feelings which bound her to this stranger. Like Maximilien, she had secretly enjoyed the sweetness of first love; but both were equally proud, and each feared to confess that love.

Maximilien Longueville, to whom Clara had communicated her not unfounded suspicions as to Emilie’s character, was by turns carried away by the violence of a young man’s passion, and held back by a wish to know and test the woman to whom he would be entrusting his happiness. His love had not hindered him from perceiving in Emilie the prejudices which marred her young nature; but before attempting to counteract them, he wished to be sure that she loved him, for he would no sooner risk the fate of his love than of his life. He had, therefore, persistently kept a silence to which his looks, his behavior, and his smallest actions gave the lie.

On her side, the self-respect natural to a young girl, augmented in Mademoiselle de Fontaine by the monstrous vanity founded on her birth and beauty, kept her from meeting the declaration half-way, which her growing passion sometimes urged her to invite. Thus the lovers had instinctively understood the situation without explaining to each other their secret motives. There are times in life when such vagueness pleases youthful minds. Just because each had postponed speaking too long, they seemed to be playing a cruel game of suspense. He was trying to discover whether he was beloved, by the effort any confession would cost his haughty mistress; she every minute hoped that he would break a too respectful silence.

Emilie, seated on a rustic bench, was reflecting on all that had happened in these three months full of enchantment. Her father’s suspicions were the last that could appeal to her; she even disposed of them at once by two or three of those reflections natural to an inexperienced girl, which, to her, seemed conclusive. Above all, she was convinced that it was impossible that she should deceive herself. All the summer through she had not been able to detect in Maximilien a single gesture, or a single word, which could indicate a vulgar origin or vulgar occupations; nay more, his manner of discussing things revealed a man devoted to the highest interests of the nation. “Besides,” she reflected, “an office clerk, a banker, or a merchant, would not be at leisure to spend a whole season in paying his addresses to me in the midst of woods and fields; wasting his time as freely as a nobleman who has life before him free of all care.”

She had given herself up to meditations far more interesting to her than these preliminary thoughts, when a slight rustling in the leaves announced to her that Maximilien had been watching her for a minute, not probably without admiration.

“Do you know that it is very wrong to take a young girl thus unawares?” she asked him, smiling.

“Especially when they are busy with their secrets,” replied Maximilien archly.

“Why should I not have my secrets? You certainly have yours.”

“Then you really were thinking of your secrets?” he went on, laughing.

“No, I was thinking of yours. My own, I know.”

“But perhaps my secrets are yours, and yours mine,” cried the young man, softly seizing Mademoiselle de Fontaine’s hand and drawing it through his arm.

After walking a few steps they found themselves under a clump of trees which the hues of the sinking sun wrapped in a haze of red and brown. This touch of natural magic lent a certain solemnity to the moment. The young man’s free and eager action, and, above all, the throbbing of his surging heart, whose hurried beating spoke to Emilie’s arm, stirred her to an emotion that was all the more disturbing because it was produced by the simplest and most innocent circumstances. The restraint under which the young girls of the upper class live gives incredible force to any explosion of feeling, and to meet an impassioned lover is one of the greatest dangers they can encounter. Never had Emilie and Maximilien allowed their eyes to say so much that they dared never speak. Carried away by this intoxication, they easily forgot the petty stipulations of pride, and the cold hesitancies of suspicion. At first, indeed, they could only express themselves by a pressure of hands which interpreted their happy thoughts.

After slowly pacing a few steps in long silence, Mademoiselle de Fontaine spoke. “Monsieur, I have a question to ask you,” she said trembling, and in an agitated voice. “But, remember, I beg, that it is in a manner compulsory on me, from the rather singular position I am in with regard to my family.”

A pause, terrible to Emilie, followed these sentences, which she had almost stammered out. During the minute while it lasted, the girl, haughty as she was, dared not meet the flashing eye of the man she loved, for she was secretly conscious of the meanness of the next words she added: “Are you of noble birth?”

As soon as the words were spoken she wished herself at the bottom of a lake.

“Mademoiselle,” Longueville gravely replied, and his face assumed a sort of stern dignity, “I promise to answer you truly as soon as you shall have answered in all sincerity a question I will put to you!”--He released her arm, and the girl suddenly felt alone in the world, as he said: “What is your object in questioning me as to my birth?”

She stood motionless, cold, and speechless.

“Mademoiselle,” Maximilien went on, “let us go no further if we do not understand each other. I love you,” he said, in a voice of deep emotion. “Well, then,” he added, as he heard the joyful exclamation she could not suppress, “why ask me if I am of noble birth?”

“Could he speak so if he were not?” cried a voice within her, which Emilie believed came from the depths of her heart. She gracefully raised her head, seemed to find new life in the young man’s gaze, and held out her hand as if to renew the alliance.

“You thought I cared very much for dignities?” said she with keen archness.

“I have no titles to offer my wife,” he replied, in a half-sportive, half-serious tone. “But if I choose one of high rank, and among women whom a wealthy home has accustomed to the luxury and pleasures of a fine fortune, I know what such a choice requires of me. Love gives everything,” he added lightly, “but only to lovers. Once married, they need something more than the vault of heaven and the carpet of a meadow.”

“He is rich,” she reflected. “As to titles, perhaps he only wants to try me. He has been told that I am mad about titles, and bent on marrying none but a peer’s son. My priggish sisters have played me that trick.”--“I assure you, monsieur,” she said aloud, “that I have had very extravagant ideas about life and the world; but now,” she added pointedly, looking at him in a perfectly distracting way, “I know where true riches are to be found for a wife.”

“I must believe that you are speaking from the depths of your heart,” he said, with gentle gravity. “But this winter, my dear Emilie, in less than two months perhaps, I may be proud of what I shall have to offer you if you care for the pleasures of wealth. This is the only secret I shall keep locked here,” and he laid his hand on his heart, “for on its success my happiness depends. I dare not say ours.”

“Yes, yes, ours!”

Exchanging such sweet nothings, they slowly made their way back to rejoin the company. Mademoiselle de Fontaine had never found her lover more amiable or wittier: his light figure, his engaging manners, seemed to her more charming than ever, since the conversation which had made her to some extent the possessor of a heart worthy to be the envy of every woman. They sang an Italian duet with so much expression that the audience applauded enthusiastically. Their adieux were in a conventional tone, which concealed their happiness. In short, this day had been to Emilie like a chain binding her more closely than ever to the Stranger’s fate. The strength and dignity he had displayed in the scene when they had confessed their feelings had perhaps impressed Mademoiselle de Fontaine with the respect without which there is no true love.

When she was left alone in the drawing-room with her father, the old man went up to her affectionately, held her hands, and asked her whether she had gained any light at to Monsieur Longueville’s family and fortune.

“Yes, my dear father,” she replied, “and I am happier than I could have hoped. In short, Monsieur de Longueville is the only man I could ever marry.”

“Very well, Emilie,” said the Count, “then I know what remains for me to do.”

“Do you know of any impediment?” she asked, in sincere alarm.

“My dear child, the young man is totally unknown to me; but unless he is not a man of honor, so long as you love him, he is as dear to me as a son.”

“Not a man of honor!” exclaimed Emilie. “As to that, I am quite easy. My uncle, who introduced him to us, will answer for him. Say, my dear uncle, has he been a filibuster, an outlaw, a pirate?”

“I knew I should find myself in this fix!” cried the old sailor, waking up. He looked round the room, but his niece had vanished “like Saint-Elmo’s fires,” to use his favorite expression.

“Well, uncle,” Monsieur de Fontaine went on, “how could you hide from us all you knew about this young man? You must have seen how anxious we have been. Is Monsieur de Longueville a man of family?”

“I don’t know him from Adam or Eve,” said the Comte de Kergarouet. “Trusting to that crazy child’s tact, I got him here by a method of my own. I know that the boy shoots with a pistol to admiration, hunts well, plays wonderfully at billiards, at chess, and at backgammon; he handles the foils, and rides a horse like the late Chevalier de Saint-Georges. He has a thorough knowledge of all our vintages. He is as good an arithmetician as Bareme, draws, dances, and sings well. The devil’s in it! what more do you want? If that is not a perfect gentleman, find me a bourgeois who knows all this, or any man who lives more nobly than he does. Does he do anything, I ask you? Does he compromise his dignity by hanging about an office, bowing down before the upstarts you call Directors-General? He walks upright. He is a man.--However, I have just found in my waistcoat pocket the card he gave me when he fancied I wanted to cut his throat, poor innocent. Young men are very simple-minded nowadays! Here it is.”

“Rue du Sentier, No. 5,” said Monsieur de Fontaine, trying to recall among all the information he had received, something which might concern the stranger. “What the devil can it mean? Messrs. Palma, Werbrust & Co., wholesale dealers in muslins, calicoes, and printed cotton goods, live there.--Stay, I have it: Longueville the deputy has an interest in their house. Well, but so far as I know, Longueville has but one son of two-and-thirty, who is not at all like our man, and to whom he gave fifty thousand francs a year that he might marry a minister’s daughter; he wants to be made a peer like the rest of ‘em.--I never heard him mention this Maximilien. Has he a daughter? What is this girl Clara? Besides, it is open to any adventurer to call himself Longueville. But is not the house of Palma, Werbrust & Co. half ruined by some speculation in Mexico or the Indies? I will clear all this up.”

“You speak a soliloquy as if you were on the stage, and seem to account me a cipher,” said the old admiral suddenly. “Don’t you know that if he is a gentleman, I have more than one bag in my hold that will stop any leak in his fortune?”

“As to that, if he is a son of Longueville’s, he will want nothing; but,” said Monsieur de Fontaine, shaking his head from side to side, “his father has not even washed off the stains of his origin. Before the Revolution he was an attorney, and the DE he has since assumed no more belongs to him than half of his fortune.”

“Pooh! pooh! happy those whose fathers were hanged!” cried the admiral gaily.

Three or four days after this memorable day, on one of those fine mornings in the month of November, which show the boulevards cleaned by the sharp cold of an early frost, Mademoiselle de Fontaine, wrapped in a new style of fur cape, of which she wished to set the fashion, went out with two of her sisters-in-law, on whom she had been wont to discharge her most cutting remarks. The three women were tempted to the drive, less by their desire to try a very elegant carriage, and wear gowns which were to set the fashion for the winter, than by their wish to see a cape which a friend had observed in a handsome lace and linen shop at the corner of the Rue de la Paix. As soon as they were in the shop the Baronne de Fontaine pulled Emilie by the sleeve, and pointed out to her Maximilien Longueville seated behind the desk, and engaged in paying out the change for a gold piece to one of the workwomen with whom he seemed to be in consultation. The “handsome stranger” held in his hand a parcel of patterns, which left no doubt as to his honorable profession.

Emilie felt an icy shudder, though no one perceived it. Thanks to the good breeding of the best society, she completely concealed the rage in her heart, and answered her sister-in-law with the words, “I knew it,” with a fulness of intonation and inimitable decision which the most famous actress of the time might have envied her. She went straight up to the desk. Longueville looked up, put the patterns in his pocket with distracting coolness, bowed to Mademoiselle de Fontaine, and came forward, looking at her keenly.

“Mademoiselle,” he said to the shopgirl, who followed him, looking very much disturbed, “I will send to settle that account; my house deals in that way. But here,” he whispered into her ear, as he gave her a thousand-franc note, “take this--it is between ourselves.--You will forgive me, I trust, mademoiselle,” he added, turning to Emilie. “You will kindly excuse the tyranny of business matters.”

“Indeed, monsieur, it seems to me that it is no concern of mine,” replied Mademoiselle de Fontaine, looking at him with a bold expression of sarcastic indifference which might have made any one believe that she now saw him for the first time.

“Do you really mean it?” asked Maximilien in a broken voice.

Emilie turned her back upon him with amazing insolence. These words, spoken in an undertone, had escaped the ears of her two sisters-in-law. When, after buying the cape, the three ladies got into the carriage again, Emilie, seated with her back to the horses, could not resist one last comprehensive glance into the depths of the odious shop, where she saw Maximilien standing with his arms folded, in the attitude of a man superior to the disaster that has so suddenly fallen on him. Their eyes met and flashed implacable looks. Each hoped to inflict a cruel wound on the heart of a lover. In one instant they were as far apart as if one had been in China and the other in Greenland.

Does not the breath of vanity wither everything? Mademoiselle de Fontaine, a prey to the most violent struggle that can torture the heart of a young girl, reaped the richest harvest of anguish that prejudice and narrow-mindedness ever sowed in a human soul. Her face, but just now fresh and velvety, was streaked with yellow lines and red patches; the paleness of her cheeks seemed every now and then to turn green. Hoping to hide her despair from her sisters, she would laugh as she pointed out some ridiculous dress or passer-by; but her laughter was spasmodic. She was more deeply hurt by their unspoken compassion than by any satirical comments for which she might have revenged herself. She exhausted her wit in trying to engage them in a conversation, in which she tried to expend her fury in senseless paradoxes, heaping on all men engaged in trade the bitterest insults and witticisms in the worst taste.

On getting home, she had an attack of fever, which at first assumed a somewhat serious character. By the end of a month the care of her parents and of the physician restored her to her family.

Every one hoped that this lesson would be severe enough to subdue Emilie’s nature; but she insensibly fell into her old habits and threw herself again into the world of fashion. She declared that there was no disgrace in making a mistake. If she, like her father, had a vote in the Chamber, she would move for an edict, she said, by which all merchants, and especially dealers in calico, should be branded on the forehead, like Berri sheep, down to the third generation. She wished that none but nobles should have the right to wear the antique French costume, which was so becoming to the courtiers of Louis XV. To hear her, it was a misfortune for France, perhaps, that there was no outward and visible difference between a merchant and a peer of France. And a hundred more such pleasantries, easy to imagine, were rapidly poured out when any accident brought up the subject.

But those who loved Emilie could see through all her banter a tinge of melancholy. It was clear that Maximilien Longueville still reigned over that inexorable heart. Sometimes she would be as gentle as she had been during the brief summer that had seen the birth of her love; sometimes, again, she was unendurable. Every one made excuses for her inequality of temper, which had its source in sufferings at once secret and known to all. The Comte de Kergarouet had some influence over her, thanks to his increased prodigality, a kind of consolation which rarely fails of its effect on a Parisian girl.

The first ball at which Mademoiselle de Fontaine appeared was at the Neapolitan ambassador’s. As she took her place in the first quadrille she saw, a few yards away from her, Maximilien Longueville, who nodded slightly to her partner.

“Is that young man a friend of yours?” she asked, with a scornful air.

“Only my brother,” he replied.

Emilie could not help starting. “Ah!” he continued, “and he is the noblest soul living----”

“Do you know my name?” asked Emilie, eagerly interrupting him.

“No, mademoiselle. It is a crime, I confess, not to remember a name which is on every lip--I ought to say in every heart. But I have a valid excuse. I have but just arrived from Germany. My ambassador, who is in Paris on leave, sent me here this evening to take care of his amiable wife, whom you may see yonder in that corner.”

“A perfect tragic mask!” said Emilie, after looking at the ambassadress.

“And yet that is her ballroom face!” said the young man, laughing. “I shall have to dance with her! So I thought I might have some compensation.” Mademoiselle de Fontaine courtesied. “I was very much surprised,” the voluble young secretary went on, “to find my brother here. On arriving from Vienna I heard that the poor boy was ill in bed; and I counted on seeing him before coming to this ball; but good policy will always allow us to indulge family affection. The Padrona della case would not give me time to call on my poor Maximilien.”

“Then, monsieur, your brother is not, like you, in diplomatic employment.”

“No,” said the attache, with a sigh, “the poor fellow sacrificed himself for me. He and my sister Clara have renounced their share of my father’s fortune to make an eldest son of me. My father dreams of a peerage, like all who vote for the ministry. Indeed, it is promised him,” he added in an undertone. “After saving up a little capital my brother joined a banking firm, and I hear he has just effected a speculation in Brazil which may make him a millionaire. You see me in the highest spirits at having been able, by my diplomatic connections, to contribute to his success. I am impatiently expecting a dispatch from the Brazilian Legation, which will help to lift the cloud from his brow. What do you think of him?”

“Well, your brother’s face does not look to me like that of a man busied with money matters.”

The young attache shot a scrutinizing glance at the apparently calm face of his partner.

“What!” he exclaimed, with a smile, “can young ladies read the thoughts of love behind the silent brow?”

“Your brother is in love, then?” she asked, betrayed into a movement of curiosity.

“Yes; my sister Clara, to whom he is as devoted as a mother, wrote to me that he had fallen in love this summer with a very pretty girl; but I have had no further news of the affair. Would you believe that the poor boy used to get up at five in the morning, and went off to settle his business that he might be back by four o’clock in the country where the lady was? In fact, he ruined a very nice thoroughbred that I had just given him. Forgive my chatter, mademoiselle; I have but just come home from Germany. For a year I have heard no decent French, I have been weaned from French faces, and satiated with Germans, to such a degree that, I believe, in my patriotic mania, I could talk to the chimeras on a French candlestick. And if I talk with a lack of reserve unbecoming in a diplomatist, the fault is yours, mademoiselle. Was it not you who pointed out my brother? When he is the theme I become inexhaustible. I should like to proclaim to all the world how good and generous he is. He gave up no less than a hundred thousand francs a year, the income from the Longueville property.”

If Mademoiselle de Fontaine had the benefit of these important revelations, it was partly due to the skill with which she continued to question her confiding partner from the moment when she found that he was the brother of her scorned lover.

“And could you, without being grieved, see your brother selling muslin and calico?” asked Emilie, at the end of the third figure of the quadrille.

“How do you know that?” asked the attache. “Thank God, though I pour out a flood of words, I have already acquired the art of not telling more than I intend, like all the other diplomatic apprentices I know.”

“You told me, I assure you.”

Monsieur de Longueville looked at Mademoiselle de Fontaine with a surprise that was full of perspicacity. A suspicion flashed upon him. He glanced inquiringly from his brother to his partner, guessed everything, clasped his hands, fixed his eyes on the ceiling, and began to laugh, saying, “I am an idiot! You are the handsomest person here; my brother keeps stealing glances at you; he is dancing in spite of his illness, and you pretend not to see him. Make him happy,” he added, as he led her back to her old uncle. “I shall not be jealous, but I shall always shiver a little at calling you my sister----”

The lovers, however, were to prove as inexorable to each other as they were to themselves. At about two in the morning, refreshments were served in an immense corridor, where, to leave persons of the same coterie free to meet each other, the tables were arranged as in a restaurant. By one of those accidents which always happen to lovers, Mademoiselle de Fontaine found herself at a table next to that at which the more important guests were seated. Maximilien was of the group. Emilie, who lent an attentive ear to her neighbors’ conversation, overheard one of those dialogues into which a young woman so easily falls with a young man who has the grace and style of Maximilien Longueville. The lady talking to the young banker was a Neapolitan duchess, whose eyes shot lightning flashes, and whose skin had the sheen of satin. The intimate terms on which Longueville affected to be with her stung Mademoiselle de Fontaine all the more because she had just given her lover back twenty times as much tenderness as she had ever felt for him before.

“Yes, monsieur, in my country true love can make every kind of sacrifice,” the Duchess was saying, in a simper.

“You have more passion than Frenchwomen,” said Maximilien, whose burning gaze fell on Emilie. “They are all vanity.”

“Monsieur,” Emilie eagerly interposed, “is it not very wrong to calumniate your own country? Devotion is to be found in every nation.”

“Do you imagine, mademoiselle,” retorted the Italian, with a sardonic smile, “that a Parisian would be capable of following her lover all over the world?”

“Oh, madame, let us understand each other. She would follow him to a desert and live in a tent but not to sit in a shop.”

A disdainful gesture completed her meaning. Thus, under the influence of her disastrous education, Emilie for the second time killed her budding happiness, and destroyed its prospects of life. Maximilien’s apparent indifference, and a woman’s smile, had wrung from her one of those sarcasms whose treacherous zest always let her astray.

“Mademoiselle,” said Longueville, in a low voice, under cover of the noise made by the ladies as they rose from the table, “no one will ever more ardently desire your happiness than I; permit me to assure you of this, as I am taking leave of you. I am starting for Italy in a few days.”

“With a Duchess, no doubt?”

“No, but perhaps with a mortal blow.”

“Is not that pure fancy?” asked Emilie, with an anxious glance.

“No,” he replied. “There are wounds which never heal.”

“You are not to go,” said the girl, imperiously, and she smiled.

“I shall go,” replied Maximilien, gravely.

“You will find me married on your return, I warn you,” she said coquettishly.

“I hope so.”

“Impertinent wretch!” she exclaimed. “How cruel a revenge!”

A fortnight later Maximilien set out with his sister Clara for the warm and poetic scenes of beautiful Italy, leaving Mademoiselle de Fontaine a prey to the most vehement regret. The young Secretary to the Embassy took up his brother’s quarrel, and contrived to take signal vengeance on Emilie’s disdain by making known the occasion of the lovers’ separation. He repaid his fair partner with interest all the sarcasm with which she had formerly attacked Maximilien, and often made more than one Excellency smile by describing the fair foe of the counting-house, the amazon who preached a crusade against bankers, the young girl whose love had evaporated before a bale of muslin. The Comte de Fontaine was obliged to use his influence to procure an appointment to Russia for Auguste Longueville in order to protect his daughter from the ridicule heaped upon her by this dangerous young persecutor.

Not long after, the Ministry being compelled to raise a levy of peers to support the aristocratic party, trembling in the Upper Chamber under the lash of an illustrious writer, gave Monsieur Guiraudin de Longueville a peerage, with the title of Vicomte. Monsieur de Fontaine also obtained a peerage, the reward due as much to his fidelity in evil days as to his name, which claimed a place in the hereditary Chamber.

About this time Emilie, now of age, made, no doubt, some serious reflections on life, for her tone and manners changed perceptibly. Instead of amusing herself by saying spiteful things to her uncle, she lavished on him the most affectionate attentions; she brought him his stick with a persevering devotion that made the cynical smile, she gave him her arm, rode in his carriage, and accompanied him in all his drives; she even persuaded him that she liked the smell of tobacco, and read him his favorite paper La Quotidienne in the midst of clouds of smoke, which the malicious old sailor intentionally blew over her; she learned piquet to be a match for the old count; and this fantastic damsel even listened without impatience to his periodical narratives of the battles of the Belle-Poule, the manoeuvres of the Ville de Paris, M. de Suffren’s first expedition, or the battle of Aboukir.

Though the old sailor had often said that he knew his longitude and latitude too well to allow himself to be captured by a young corvette, one fine morning Paris drawing-rooms heard the news of the marriage of Mademoiselle de Fontaine to the Comte de Kergarouet. The young Countess gave splendid entertainments to drown thought; but she, no doubt, found a void at the bottom of the whirlpool; luxury was ineffectual to disguise the emptiness and grief of her sorrowing soul; for the most part, in spite of the flashes of assumed gaiety, her beautiful face expressed unspoken melancholy. Emilie appeared, however, full of attentions and consideration for her old husband, who, on retiring to his rooms at night, to the sounds of a lively band, would often say, “I do not know myself. Was I to wait till the age of seventy-two to embark as pilot on board the Belle Emilie after twenty years of matrimonial galleys?”

The conduct of the young Countess was marked by such strictness that the most clear-sighted criticism had no fault to find with her. Lookers on chose to think that the vice-admiral had reserved the right of disposing of his fortune to keep his wife more tightly in hand; but this was a notion as insulting to the uncle as to the niece. Their conduct was indeed so delicately judicious that the men who were most interested in guessing the secrets of the couple could never decide whether the old Count regarded her as a wife or as a daughter. He was often heard to say that he had rescued his niece as a castaway after shipwreck; and that, for his part, he had never taken a mean advantage of hospitality when he had saved an enemy from the fury of the storm. Though the Countess aspired to reign in Paris and tried to keep pace with Mesdames the Duchesses de Maufrigneuse and du Chaulieu, the Marquises d’Espard and d’Aiglemont, the Comtesses Feraud, de Montcornet, and de Restaud, Madame de Camps, and Mademoiselle des Touches, she did not yield to the addresses of the young Vicomte de Portenduere, who made her his idol.

Two years after her marriage, in one of the old drawing-rooms in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, where she was admired for her character, worthy of the old school, Emilie heard the Vicomte de Longueville announced. In the corner of the room where she was sitting, playing piquet with the Bishop of Persepolis, her agitation was not observed; she turned her head and saw her former lover come in, in all the freshness of youth. His father’s death, and then that of his brother, killed by the severe climate of Saint-Petersburg, had placed on Maximilien’s head the hereditary plumes of the French peer’s hat. His fortune matched his learning and his merits; only the day before his youthful and fervid eloquence had dazzled the Assembly. At this moment he stood before the Countess, free, and graced with all the advantages she had formerly required of her ideal. Every mother with a daughter to marry made amiable advances to a man gifted with the virtues which they attributed to him, as they admired his attractive person; but Emilie knew, better than any one, that the Vicomte de Longueville had the steadfast nature in which a wise woman sees a guarantee of happiness. She looked at the admiral who, to use his favorite expression, seemed likely to hold his course for a long time yet, and cursed the follies of her youth.

At this moment Monsieur de Persepolis said with Episcopal grace: “Fair lady, you have thrown away the king of hearts--I have won. But do not regret your money. I keep it for my little seminaries.”

PARIS, December 1829.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Beaudenord, Godefroid de
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Firm of Nucingen

     Dudley, Lady Arabella
       The Lily of the Valley
       The Magic Skin
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Daughter of Eve
       Letters of Two Brides

     Fontaine, Comte de
       The Chouans
       Modeste Mignon
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Government Clerks

     Kergarouet, Comte de
       The Purse
       Ursule Mirouet

     Louis XVIII., Louis-Stanislas-Xavier
       The Chouans
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Lily of the Valley
       Colonel Chabert
       The Government Clerks

     Manerville, Paul Francois-Joseph, Comte de
       The Thirteen
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Marriage Settlement

     Marsay, Henri de
       The Thirteen
       The Unconscious Humorists
       Another Study of Woman
       The Lily of the Valley
       Father Goriot
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Marriage Settlement
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Letters of Two Brides
       Modest Mignon
       The Secrets of a Princess
       The Gondreville Mystery
       A Daughter of Eve

     Palma (banker)
       The Firm of Nucingen
       Cesar Birotteau
       Gobseck
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

     Portenduere, Vicomte Savinien de
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Ursule Mirouet
       Beatrix

     Rastignac, Eugene de
       Father Goriot
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Interdiction
       A Study of Woman
       Another Study of Woman
       The Magic Skin
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Gondreville Mystery
       The Firm of Nucingen
       Cousin Betty
       The Member for Arcis
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Vandenesse, Marquise Charles de (Emilie de Fontaine)
       Cesar Birotteau
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Daughter of Eve
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################