PREPARER’S NOTE

Two Poets is part one of a trilogy and begins the story of Lucien, his sister Eve, and his friend David in the provincial town of Angoulême. Part two, A Distinguished Provincial at Paris, follows Lucien’s Parisian life. Part three, Eve and David, returns to Angoulême. Often parts one and three are combined under the title Lost Illusions, while A Distinguished Provincial at Paris stands separately. Lucien’s story continues later in Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life.

DEDICATION

To Monsieur Victor Hugo,

It was your birthright to be, like a Rafael or a Pitt, a great poet at an age when others are children; it was your fate, as with Chateaubriand and every man of genius, to struggle against jealousy lurking in newspapers and the subterranean places of journalism. For this reason I desired that your victorious name should help to win a victory for this work, which some say is an act of courage as well as a veracious history. If there had been journalists in Molière’s time, who can doubt they would have been within the province of the playwright? Why should Comedy, qui castigat ridendo mores, exempt one power when the Parisian press spares none? I am happy to subscribe myself your sincere admirer and friend,

DE BALZAC.

TWO POETS

When this story opens, the Stanhope press and the modern ink roller were not yet common in small provincial printing houses. Even in Angoulême, tied to paper-mills and Parisian typography, the machinery remained primitive: wooden presses, leather ink-balls, and a heavy movable marble “impression-stone.” This obsolete gear, to which Jérôme-Nicolas Séchard had a near-superstitious affection, figures in this chronicle.

Séchard had been a journeyman pressman, nicknamed a “bear” in compositors’ slang—so called for the pacing of the pressman from ink-table to press. “Bears” called compositors “monkeys” for their nimble fingering of type from the many compartments of the cases.

In the disastrous year 1793, Séchard, fifty and married, escaped the great Requisition that swept most workmen into the army. He was the only hand left in the printing-house; when the master died, leaving a widow but no children, the business seemed doomed because the solitary “bear” could not become a “monkey” and, as a pressman, could neither read nor write. A Representative of the People, hurried to publish Convention Decrees, bestowed a master printer’s license on Séchard and requisitioned the establishment. Jérôme-Nicolas accepted the dangerous patent, bought the business from the widow with his wife’s savings, and took over the plant at half value—but he still had to print the Republic’s decrees without mistakes.

At this crisis Séchard was fortunate to find a noble Marseillais unwilling to emigrate or risk his head, who agreed to work disguised in a provincial printer’s jacket. M. le Comte de Maucombe set up, read, and corrected the decrees that forbade citizens to harbor aristocrats; the “bear” printed and posted them, and both remained safe.

In 1795, when the Terror had passed, Séchard needed a new jack-of-all-trades to be compositor, reader, and foreman; an Abbé who declined the oath succeeded the Count after the First Consul restored public worship. The Abbé later became a Bishop at the Restoration; in time the Count and the Abbé met again on the same bench in the House of Peers.

By 1795 Jérôme-Nicolas had not learned to read or write; by 1802 he still had not; yet by allowing a large margin for “wear and tear” in his estimates, he managed to pay a foreman’s wages. Once an easy-going journeyman, he became a terror to his “bears” and “monkeys.” Where poverty ceases, avarice begins. On glimpsing the possibility of making a fortune, covetousness sharpened a practical faculty for business—greedy, suspicious, and keen-eyed. He scorned theory; he could estimate at a glance the cost of printing per page or sheet for every kind of type. He proved to unlettered customers that large type costs more to move; if small type was discussed, he argued it was more difficult to handle. Setting up type was the one part of the craft he did not know; afraid of undercharging, he always made a heavy profit. He never took his eyes off compositors paid by the hour. If a paper manufacturer was in trouble, he bought up stock cheap and warehoused it. So he became his own landlord and owned the old house that had been a printing office for ages.

He had every sort of luck. He was left a widower with one son. He sent the boy to grammar school, not so much for the child’s sake as to train a successor; and Séchard treated the lad harshly to prolong parental rule, making him work at case on holidays and telling him he must learn to earn his living to repay his father’s toil.

The Abbé left and Séchard promoted one of his four compositors to foreman, chosen on the future bishop’s recommendation as an honest, intelligent man. These measures, Séchard thought, would tide him over until his son could take over what he expected to be a flourishing business.

David Séchard’s school career was brilliant. Old Séchard, as a self-made man without education, entertained considerable contempt for book learning; yet when he sent his son to Paris to study higher typography, he insisted David save money and not draw on the paternal purse. David learned his trade and completed his education without costing his father a farthing; Didot’s foreman became a scholar. At the end of 1819 he was summoned home to take the helm.

Until then Jérôme-Nicolas’s establishment had enjoyed a monopoly of regional official printing plus the prefecture and diocese—connections that should have been profitable. But just then the firm of Cointet Brothers, paper manufacturers, applied for a second printer’s license in Angoulême. Séchard had kept the license dormant during wartime atrophy but neglected to buy it outright; this parsimony threatened ruin. Séchard rejoiced when he heard the coming struggle would be fought by his son and not by himself—“a young fellow from the Didots will pull through,” he thought.

The septuagenarian sighed for an easy life. Though his knowledge of higher typography was slight, he was master of “tipple-ography,” an art in which he indulged. Bound by the laws of etymology to be a dry subject, he suffered from an inextinguishable thirst. His wife had controlled the passion in her life, but old age revived it. The habit altered his appearance: a large nose, veined cheeks like vine-leaves, and bloated purple patches gave his face a truffled look. His small gray eyes, under thick brows, glimmered with the cunning of avarice that had supplanted fatherly instinct. Those eyes retained their craftiness even in drink. Séchard resembled one of La Fontaine’s friars with a fringe of grizzled hair about a bald pate—short, corpulent, like an old-fashioned lamp burning much oil for a small wick; excess confirmed his body’s condition.

For thirty years he had worn the municipal three-cornered hat still seen on provincial towncriers. His breeches and waistcoat were greenish velveteen, with an old brown greatcoat, gray cotton stockings, and shoes with silver buckles. This costume suited the man so completely it seemed part of his nature. If the old printer had been given to blind greed, it showed plainly in his manner of abdicating.

Knowing his son had learned the business thoroughly at Didot’s, Jérôme-Nicolas had long plotted the bargain he meant to drive with David. All that the father made, the son was to lose, but in business Jérôme-Nicolas knew nothing of father or son. At first he regarded David as his only child; later he saw him as the natural purchaser of the business and therefore an antagonist whose duty it was to get the better of him. The transformation of sentiment into self-seeking, slow and veiled in more educated people, was swift and direct in the old “bear,” who showed the superiority of shrewd tipple-ography over book-learned typography.

David returned home and the old man greeted him with the cordiality that cunning folk assume for business. He fussed over him—giving his arm, cautioning where to set his foot, warming his bed, making supper. After a sumptuous dinner and much potation, Jérôme-Nicolas began, between hiccoughs, with “Now for business.” David begged to postpone; the old “bear” would not. He had dragged the chain fifty years and would not wait another hour; his son would be “gaffer” tomorrow.

A word about the premises: the printing-house had stood since Louis XIV’s reign at the angle of Rue de Beaulieu and Place du Mûrier. The ground floor was a single large room lit by a street casement and a sash window to the yard; a side passage led to the private office. In the provinces, typography excited curiosity, so customers entered through the street glass door and descended three steps because the workshop floor lay below street level. Newcomers, staring at sheets strung across the ceiling, often ran into cases or tie-bars; they watched compositors pick out type from the hundred and fifty-two compartments, read copy, and assemble lines, only to trip over a ream of damp paper or bump against a bench—delighting the boys, “bears,” and “monkeys.” No one passed through the shop without mishap. Two glass-windowed cages extended into the yard for foreman and master. The yard walls were decorated with trellised vines—tempting, given the owner’s reputation. One side held the kitchen, the other the woodshed, and a ramshackle penthouse against the hall housed paper trimming and damping; there forms—masses of set-up type—were washed. Inky streams from there mixed with kitchen waste and ran into the kennel in the street, so peasants thought the Devil was taking a wash inside the establishment.

Above the shop, the house had three rooms on the first floor and two attic rooms. The first room served as dining-room and lobby; it was the same length as the passage below, minus the old wooden staircase, and lit by a narrow casement and a bull’s-eye into the yard. Its chief trait was a cynical simplicity born of money-making greed: bare whitewashed walls, a dirty brick floor never scoured, three rickety chairs, a round table, and a sideboard between bedroom and sitting-room doors. Windows and doors were dingy. Reams of paper or printed matter cluttered the floor; remains of Séchard’s dinners, empty bottles, and plates lay among packages.

The bedroom, lit to the yard by a leaded window, was hung with old-world tapestry typical in provincial houses on Corpus Christi Day. Its furniture was the old Seigneur Rouzeau’s: a vast four-post bed with canopy, valances, and crimson serge quilt; a couple of worm-eaten armchairs, two tapestry-covered walnut chairs, an aged bureau, and a mantel clock. The room remained as Rouzeau had left it.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The sitting-room had been modernized by the late Mme. Séchard; the walls had a powder-blue wainscot, panels papered with sepia Oriental scenes, and six lyre-backed chairs with blue leather cushions. Two clumsy arched windows looked onto the Place du Mûrier and were without curtains; no clock, sconce, or mirror crowned the mantel-shelf, for Mme. Séchard had died before finishing her scheme; and the “bear,” seeing no profit in further improvements, had left it as it was.

Pede titubante, Jérôme-Nicolas Séchard brought his son into the sitting-room and pointed to a sheet—a foreman’s valuation of the plant prepared under his direction.

“Read that, my boy,” said Jérôme-Nicolas, rolling a wine-dark eye from the paper to David and back. “‘Three wooden presses, held in position by iron tie-bars, cast-iron plates—’”

“An improvement of my own,” the father added.

“‘—Together with all the implements, ink-tables, balls, benches, et cetera, sixteen hundred francs!’” David cried, letting the sheet fall. “These presses are old sabots not worth a hundred crowns; they’re only fit for firewood.”

“Sabots?” shouted the old man. “Sabots? Take the inventory and come downstairs. You’ll see whether your paltry iron contrivances will work like these solid old tools, tried and trusty. You won’t slander honest presses that go like mail coaches and will last a lifetime without repairs. Sabots! My fatherly sabots have carried me twenty years; they helped make you what you are.”

Old Séchard lurched down the worn staircase that shook under his tread, threw open the workshop door, flew to the nearest press—oiled and cleaned for the occasion—and pointed out the strong oaken cheeks polished by the apprentice.

“Isn’t it a love of a press?”

A wedding announcement lay in the press. The old “bear” folded the frisket and tympan, ran in the carriage, worked the lever, drew it out and lifted the frisket and tympan with all the agility of the youngest. The press creaked loudly, as though some bird had dashed against a window and flown away. “Where is the English press that could go at that pace?” he asked his astonished son.

He repeated the manoeuvre at the second and third presses. Seeing a patch overlooked by the apprentice on the third, he swore and rubbed it with his coat skirt, like a horse-dealer polishing an animal he wants to sell. “With those three presses, David, you can make your nine thousand francs a year without a foreman. As your future partner, I’m opposed to replacing them by your cursed cast-iron machinery that wears out the type. You in Paris have been making such a to-do about that damned Englishman’s invention—foreigners who make fortunes for ironfounders. You wanted Stanhopes, did you? Thanks for your Stanhopes, costing two thousand five hundred francs apiece—twice as much as my three jewels—and they maul your type to pieces. I haven’t book-learning like you, but remember, the life of the Stanhope is the death of the type. These three presses will do; people in Angoulême won’t ask more. You may print with wood or iron or gold, they’ll never pay you more.”

David read on: “‘Item, five thousand pounds weight of type from M. Vaflard’s foundry—’” The Didots’ apprentice could not help smiling.

“Laugh away! After twelve years of wear that type is as good as new. That is what I call a typefounder! M. Vaflard is honest and uses hard metal; the best typefounder is the one you go to least often.”

“‘—Taken at ten thousand francs,’” pursued David. “Ten thousand francs, father! Two francs a pound! The Didots only ask thirty-six sous for their Cicero! These nail-heads of yours will only fetch old-metal price—fivepence a pound.”

“You call M. Gillé’s italics, running-hand and round-hand, ‘nail-heads,’ do you? M. Gillé used to be printer to the Emperor! Type at six francs a pound—masterpieces bought five years ago. Some sorts are as bright as when they left the foundry. Look!” He pounced on packets of unused sorts and held them out.

David saw there was no bridging the gap; it was take it or leave it. The ropes across the ceiling and every small item were included in the inventory; jobbing chases, wetting-boards, paste-pots, rinsing-troughs, lye-brushes, all valued with miserly exactitude. The total came to thirty thousand francs, including the license and goodwill. David asked himself if it was feasible.

Old Séchard, uneasy at his son’s silence, preferred stormy argument to wordless acceptance. He believed chaffering indicated someone who knew how to look after his interests: “A man who will pay anything you ask will pay nothing,” he thought. He extolled hot-presses and cutting-presses and the virtues of old tools. “Old tools are always the best tools,” he said; “in our line they ought to fetch more than the new, like goldbeaters’ tools.” Hideous vignettes, masks for theatrical posters, and other old ornaments became treasures in the old man’s vinous eloquence. “Paris is Paris; the provinces are the provinces. If a man came from L’Houmeau asking for wedding cards, he’d want a Cupid and garlands, not a plain M after the Didots’ style. Your inventions won’t take in the provinces for another hundred years.”

David was sensitive and affectionate, disliking dispute, and his loftiness left him at a disadvantage in bargaining with his father, who appeared sincere and credited with good intentions; David took his covetousness for attachment to familiar tools. Still, Jérôme-Nicolas had bought the place from Rouzeau’s widow for ten thousand francs in assignats; thirty thousand in coin seemed exorbitant.

“Father, you are cutting my throat!” exclaimed David.

“I,” cried the old toper, pointing to the ceiling ropes, “I who gave you life? Do you know what the license is worth? The sheet of advertisements alone at fivepence a line brought in five hundred francs last month. Turn up the books and see what we make by placards, the prefecture registers, the mayor’s work, and the bishop’s. You are a do-nothing who won’t get on. You haggle over the horse that will carry you to Marsac.”

Attached to the valuation was a deed of partnership. The father would let house and premises to the new firm for twelve hundred francs per annum, reserving one of the garret rooms for himself. Until David paid the purchase money in full, profits were to be divided equally; once paid off, David would be sole proprietor.

David mentally calculated the value of the license, goodwill, and paper stock, leaving plant out. He thought it possible to clear the debt and accepted the conditions. The old man, used to peasants’ bargaining, wondered whether David had hidden money or was planning not to pay. He tried to get some payment on account; David kept his purse closed.

Next day the old man had the apprentice move household stuff to the attic until an empty market cart could take it back to the country. David entered on the day he was installed into the printing-house—three bare unfurnished rooms—without a sou to pay his men. When he asked his father, as partner, to contribute to working expenses, the old man pretended not to understand: he’d found the printing-house but wasn’t bound to find money too. Pressed, he answered that when he paid Rouzeau’s widow he had had not a penny left. If he, a poor ignorant working man, had made his way, Didot’s apprentice should do still better. Had not David earned money thanks to an education paid for by his father’s sweat? Now the education should be useful.

“What have you done with your ‘polls?’” he demanded, meaning David’s savings.

“Why, had I not to live? and books to buy besides?” David answered indignantly.

“Oh! you bought books? You’ll make a poor man of business. A man who buys books is hardly fit to print them,” retorted the “bear.”

David endured the humiliating shame of a parent’s contempt and niggardly explanations. He saw he was alone and that his father was trying to make money out of him; with a philosophical curiosity he tested how far the old man would go. He asked about his mother’s fortune; perhaps it might pay working expenses.

“Your mother’s fortune?” echoed old Séchard. “Why, it was her beauty and intelligence!”

David understood at once. Any legal claim would be long, expensive, and disgraceful. He accepted the heavy burden of his engagements, resolved to work. “After all, if I have a rough time of it, so had the old man; besides, I shall be working for myself, shall I not?”

“I am leaving you a treasure,” said Séchard, uneasy at his son’s silence.

“What treasure?” asked David.

“Marion!” said his father.

Marion, a big country girl, was indispensable—damping paper, cutting it, cooking, washing, marketing, unloading paper carts, collecting accounts, cleaning ink-balls. Had she known how to read, she might have set up type.

Old Séchard set out on foot for the country. Delighted by the sale, he was not at ease about payment. A vendor’s agony of uncertain completion succeeded his pleasure. Passion, the narrator observes, is Jesuitical; the miser, believing in honor and education, mortgaged thirty thousand francs on the expectation that his son’s training and fine feelings would make him pay. By the time he reached Marsac, he was persuaded David would pay. The old man had bought a little property there in 1809, added bits of land, and given up the press for vineyard labor; he had been in the line so long that he ought to know something about it.

In his first year of rural retirement, Séchard senior paced his vine props with a careful countenance. The thought of thirty thousand francs intoxicated him; he fingered the coin in imagination. The less one’s claim looks solid, the keener the appetite for it grows. He hurried from Marsac to Angoulême to see how matters went. There stood the presses; the apprentice in a paper cap cleaned the ink-balls; a press creaked over a trade circular; the type remained unchanged; in the dens he saw his son and the foreman reading books, which he took for proof-sheets. He would join David at dinner and return to Marsac, chewing the cud of uneasy reflection.

Avarice, like love, has second sight and clings to presentiments. Far from the shop, the old man felt disquieting symptoms of inactivity in his son. The name of Cointet Brothers haunted him; he feared Séchard & Son dropping into second place. His presentiments proved rightly founded: disaster hovered.

Indifferent to political reactions, David tried to remain neutral on burning issues. Provincial men of business had to profess politics to secure patronage; the Cointet Brothers deliberately assimilated monarchical opinion. They fasted on Fridays, kept Lent, haunted the cathedral, cultivated the clergy. When devotional books came back into demand, the Cointets profited handsomely. They slandered David as a Liberal and as immoral because of his father’s reputation; they argued they needed the business for their families and urged customers away.

These tales worked. The monopoly of prefectorial and diocesan work gradually passed to Cointet Brothers; David’s remaining circulation fell by half as rivals started a second local sheet of announcements. The Cointets grew richer from their devotional books and offered to buy Séchard’s printing-paper and the departmental announcements.

The news sent David’s father rushing from Marsac. “Leave me to manage the Cointets,” he said; “don’t you meddle.” He saw what the Cointets meant and took alarm. If David gave up the paper, the connection would be lost; all depended on the paper. The Cointets had tried to ruin the Séchards by accusing them of Liberalism, giving them a plank to cling to—the Liberal customers should keep the Séchards. “Sell the paper! Why, you might as well sell the stock-in-trade and the license!”

Old Séchard, fond of his son, now sided with him—at least in appearance—bringing his son to the front as a peasant brings in his wife. He asked the Cointets sixty thousand francs for the printing business so as not to ruin his son. David was unwilling; offers were wrung from the Cointets until, after effort, they offered twenty-two thousand francs for the Charente Chronicle. But David had to pledge thenceforward to print no newspaper under penalty of thirty thousand francs damages.

That deal was the deathblow to the Séchard establishment; but the old vinegrower cared little. To pocket the ready money he consented to abandon his share of the business but not the premises; the rent remained at the famous twelve hundred francs per annum.

After the sale, he came into town rarely, pleading age, though he still loved his stock-in-trade. The old foreman, who had gone to the rival establishment, knew exactly how much this fatherly generosity was worth; the old fox meant to reserve a right to interfere and had arranged to appear in the bankruptcy as a privileged creditor for arrears of rent.

The causes of David’s heedlessness illustrate his character. A few days after taking over the paternal office he met an old school friend in dire poverty. Lucien Chardon, about twenty-one, son of a surgeon-major, had been brought up in scientific habits. His father, a chemist by bent, had run a retail druggist business and died having worked on a gout specific; the great discovery that should have brought wealth was lost with him. The father had married a beautiful woman of the Rubempré family, who had been saved from the guillotine in 1793 by the claim she was pregnant. The marriage had been made in straitened circumstances; their children inherited the mother’s beauty but were left almost destitute when the father died.

M. Chardon’s devotion to science might have led him to give his children a good education. The family had been accustomed to a comfortable income; now poor, the mother and daughter accepted humble employments. Mme. Chardon sold the druggist’s shop and, on small capital income of three hundred francs invested, earned seven francs a week as a monthly nurse, taking the name Madame Charlotte to spare Lucien embarrassment. Lucien’s sister Eve worked for a laundress and earned modest wages. The combined incomes—Mme. Chardon’s rentes of three hundred and the women’s scant earnings—amounted to about eight hundred francs a year for three persons, barely adequate.

Lucien, once a brilliant pupil at Angoulême grammar school and in the third form when David left, had been trained by a father’s passion for natural science. Worn out by penury and impatient at twenty, he accepted David’s generous offer of forty francs a month to come and learn the printer’s reader’s work—David had no real need of a reader but saved Lucien from despair. Their school friendship renewed, their bond deepened through shared hopes and misfortune. Both possessed intelligence and literary taste; Lucien aimed at speculative natural science and literary fame; David, meditative and poetic, was drawn to natural science too. They soon became almost brothers in devotion. David glimpsed Eve’s fair face and loved, and, seeing the mother and sister’s blind devotion to Lucien, was moved to add his support; he believed in Lucien’s genius with exaggerated confidence.

In a moment of urgent need the two ruminated on ways to make a fortune. Lucien recalled two of his father’s ideas: a chemical method to refine sugar and an American vegetable fibre for making paper à la chinoise, promising huge savings in raw material. David seized on the paper-fibre idea, seeing a fortune and treating Lucien as benefactor.

Their ruling thoughts and inner lives unfitted them for the practical running of a printing-house. Instead of making fifteen to twenty thousand francs as the Cointets did, Séchard & Son made barely three hundred francs per month, from which the foreman’s salary, Marion’s wages, rent and taxes had to be paid; David himself scarcely made twelve hundred francs a year. Active businesspeople would have bought new type and machinery and sought cheap Paris orders; but master and foreman, absorbed in intellectual pursuits, were content with whatever business trickled in.

The Cointets, understanding David’s habits, did not anathematize him now; policy required letting the business flicker on so it wouldn’t be taken over by a stronger rival. They sent prospectuses and job-printing work to the Séchards, a practice akin to mail-coach owners setting up sham opposition coaches to keep rivals out. Unwittingly, David owed his commercial existence to their cunning. They behaved fairly in appearance but were tactically clever.

Both inside and out, the condition of the Séchard establishment testified to the old “bear’s” sordid avarice, who never spent a sou on repairs. The old house had weathered sun and rain until it resembled a venerable tree trunk, seamed and cracked. The front, brick and stone, bent beneath a worm-eaten roof of curved pantiles. Decrepit casements, heavy shutters, iron cross bars—there was no more dilapidated house in Angoulême. Picture the workshop: lit at either end and dark in the middle; walls plastered with handbills and begrimed by thirty years of handling; a cobweb of cordage across the ceiling; stacks of paper, old-fashioned presses, slabs for weighting damp sheets, rows of cases, and two dens in the corners where the master printer and foreman sat—and you will have some idea of the life lived by the two friends.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
One day early in May, 1821, David and Lucien stood by the window looking into the yard. It was nearly two o’clock; a few men were going out to dinner. David waited until the apprentice had closed the street door, then, as if the smells of paper, ink, presses and old wood had become unbearable, he drew Lucien into the yard. They sat under the vines, keeping the office and door in view. Sunbeams played among the trellised shoots, brightening their heads and setting the contrast between their faces and characters as if by a great painter’s art.

David’s build belonged to the fighter: broad shoulders, a full frame, thick black hair, a swarthy complexion, a thick neck suggesting rough solidity. Closer inspection—lines about the lips, a chin’s dimple, square nostrils, a broad cleft, and above all the eyes—revealed his true nature: thoughtful, strenuous melancholy; a spirit that discerned horizons on both sides and foresaw the ends of winding ways, capable of clear analysis and quick to abandon joys that existed only as ideas. One expected flashes of genius and saw the ashes of an extinguished volcano—hopes quenched by the social annihilation to which low birth and lack of fortune condemn many loftier minds. Near this poor printer—who loathed the handicraft allied to intellectual work—stood Lucien, graceful as a sculptured Bacchus.

Lucien’s face bore the distinction of antique beauty: a Greek profile, velvet-white skin, eyes so blue they looked dark against their pearly setting, dewy and childlike beneath long chestnut lashes and penciled brows. Silken down on his cheeks and bright curling hair gleamed in the sunlight. A divine graciousness settled on his temples; a matchless nobleness softened the short chin. His smile—coral lips, even teeth—was the smile of a sorrowing angel. Lucien’s hands were shapely, the hands that command men and charm women. Slender and of middle height, his contours might suggest a girl in disguise, a feature often found in keen-witted men. Yet his restless mind, when analyzing society, often adopted the lower ground of diplomatists who hold that success justifies any means. Great intellects suffer by understanding both good and evil.

Both judged society by lofty standards because their social position was at the lowest end; unrecognized power avenges low station by viewing the world from on high. Their flights into upper regions of thought only left them more bitter and hopeless. Lucien had read widely and compared; David had thought much and deeply. Despite the young printer’s robust, country-bred appearance, his mind was melancholy and somewhat morbid—he lacked confidence; but Lucien, with an almost effeminate figure, had the Gascon temperament in abundance—rash, brave, adventurous, inclined to see the bright side and to shrink from the dark. His nature would stoop to no crime if anything could be gained, and he could laugh at vice that served as a stepping-stone. For the moment these tendencies were checked partly by youthful illusions and partly by enthusiasm that led him to prefer nobler methods, as every man in love with glory does at first. Lucien struggled with himself and his desires, not with the baseness of others; he wrestled with his own power rather than with the world’s example. The brilliancy of his intellect attracted David keenly. David admired his friend while keeping him out of scrapes into which the furie française led him.

David’s well-balanced mind and timid nature contrasted with his strong constitution; he had the persistence of the Northern temper—seeing all difficulties yet vowing to conquer and not give way. In him the unswerving virtue of an apostle was softened by pity born of inexhaustible indulgence. In their mature friendship one was the worshiper—David; Lucien ruled him like a woman sure of love, and David loved to yield. He felt that his friend’s physical beauty implied real superiority, which he accepted, seeing himself as coarser human clay.

“The ox for patient labor in the fields, the free life for the bird,” he thought. “I will be the ox, and Lucien shall be the eagle.”

For three years they had shared destinies bright with promise. Together they read the great works since the Peace—Schiller, Goethe, Byron, Scott, Jean-Paul, Berzelius, Davy, Cuvier, Lamartine, and many more. They warmed themselves at these intellectual hearths; attempted creations lay aside and taken up again with renewed enthusiasm. Incessantly they worked with youthful vitality; comrades in poverty, comrades in consuming love of art and science, till they forgot the hard present, minds bent on laying foundations of future fame.

“Lucien,” said David, “do you know what I have just received from Paris?” He drew a tiny volume from his pocket. “Listen!”

David read, as a poet can read, André de Chénier’s Idyll Néere, then Le Malade, the Elegy on a Suicide, another elegy in classic taste, and the last two Iambes.

“So that is André de Chénier!” Lucien repeated. “It fills one with despair!” he cried when David had to stop from emotion. “A poet rediscovered by a poet!” he said, reading the prefatory signature.

“After Chénier had written those poems, he thought he had written nothing worth publishing,” added David.

Then Lucien read aloud the fragment L’Aveugle and two Elegies, and on the line—

If they know not bliss, is there happiness on earth?

—he pressed the book to his lips and tears came to both eyes, for the two were lovers and fellow-worshipers.

The vine-stems were changing with spring; they covered the rifted walls of the old house—fluted columns, knots, bas-reliefs and grotesques—fairy-work in a gloomy yard. Fancy had scattered flowers and crimson gems over the place, and Chénier’s Camille became for David the Eve he worshiped, for Lucien a great lady to whom he paid homage. Poetry had shaken out her starry robe above the workshop where “monkeys” and “bears” were grotesquely busy among types and presses. Five o’clock struck, but the friends felt neither hunger nor thirst; life was a golden dream, and all the treasures of the world lay at their feet. Far on the horizon lay the blue streak to which Hope points in storm and stress; a siren voice sounded, calling, “Come, spread your wings; through that streak lies escape from evil fortune!”

Just then the low glass door of the workshop opened, and out came Cérizet, an apprentice David had brought from Paris. He introduced a stranger, who saluted politely and spoke to David.

“This, sir, is a monograph I am desirous of printing,” he said, producing a huge package of manuscript. “Will you oblige me with an estimate?”

“We do not undertake work on such a scale, sir,” David answered without looking at it. “You had better see the Messieurs Cointet about it.”

“Still we have a very pretty type which might suit it,” Lucien put in, taking up the roll. “Leave your commission with us and call again to-morrow, and we will give you an estimate.”

“Have I the pleasure of addressing M. Lucien Chardon?”

“Yes, sir,” said the foreman.

“I am fortunate to meet a young poet destined to such greatness,” returned the author. “Mme. de Bargeton sent me here.”

Lucien flushed at the name and stammered something about gratitude for Mme. de Bargeton’s interest. David noticed his friend’s embarrassed color and left him in conversation with the country gentleman—the author of a monograph on silk-culture, prompted by vanity to print his effort for fellow-members of the agricultural society.

When the author had gone, David spoke.

“Lucien, are you in love with Mme. de Bargeton?”

“Passionately.”

“But social prejudices set you as far apart as if she were in Pekin and you in Greenland.”

“The will of two lovers can rise victorious over all things,” Lucien said, lowering his eyes.

“You will forget us,” returned the alarmed friend, as Eve’s fair face rose before his mind.

“On the contrary, I have perhaps sacrificed my love to you,” cried Lucien.

“What do you mean?”

“In spite of my love, and motives that might secure a footing in her house, I have told her I will never go thither again unless another is made welcome too—a man whose gifts are greater than mine, a man destined for a brilliant future—David Séchard, my brother, my friend. I shall find an answer waiting when I go home. All the aristocrats may have been asked to hear me read this evening, but I shall not go if the answer is negative, and I will never set foot in Mme. de Bargeton’s house again.”

David brushed tears from his eyes and wrung Lucien’s hand. The clock struck six.

“Eve must be anxious; good-bye,” Lucien added abruptly.

He hurried away. David stood overcome by emotion; the friends were like two young swans with wings unclipped by provincial experience.

“Heart of gold!” David exclaimed as his eyes followed Lucien across the workshop.

Lucien went down to L’Houmeau along the broad Promenade de Beaulieu, the Rue du Minage, and Saint-Peter’s Gate. It was the longest way round; Mme. de Bargeton’s house lay on the route. For two months he had made the long circuit daily to pass under her windows, though she knew nothing of his presence.

Under the trees of Beaulieu he saw how far the suburb lay from the city. Custom had raised barriers harder to surmount than the steep steps he descended. Youth and ambition had thrown a flying-bridge of glory across the gulf between city and suburb, yet Lucien was uneasy over his lady’s answer as any favorite who has tried to climb higher and fears he may fall. This needs explanation for those unfamiliar with the manners of cities divided into upper and lower town; therefore a brief topographical sketch is necessary to understand Mme. de Bargeton’s position.

The old city of Angoulême perches atop a crag like a sugar-loaf, overlooking the plain where the Charente winds. The crag is an outlying spur terminating abruptly above the road from Paris to Bordeaux, marking three picturesque valleys. Ramparts, great gateways and the ruined fortress on the summit witness the stronghold’s past importance. But its old-world strength is modern weakness; Angoulême could not spread down to the Charente. Shut in between ramparts and steep crag, the old town was condemned to stagnation.

The Government tried to extend the town toward Périgord, building a Prefecture, a Naval School, and barracks, opening roads. Private enterprise had been beforehand. The suburb of L’Houmeau sprang up at the crag’s foot and along the riverside where the road runs from Paris to Bordeaux. The great paper-mills of Angoulême, established centuries earlier on the Charente and its branches where falls of water existed, and the State marine ordnance factory at Ruelle, some six miles away, made the lower town lively. Carriers, wheelwrights, posthouses, inns—every industry living by road or river—crowded Lower Angoulême. Tanners, laundries, waterside trades, brandy-stores and warehouses lined the quays.

Thus the Faubourg of L’Houmeau became a busy, prosperous city, a rival to the upper town in activity and wealth, though it remained an appendage. The noblesse and officialdom dwelt on the crag; trade and wealth stayed below. No love is lost between such sections anywhere, and in Angoulême it was hard to say which detested the other more. Under the Empire the machinery worked, but the Restoration heightened exasperation.

Nearly every house in the upper town is inhabited by noble or old burgher families living on incomes—a sort of autochthonous nation that admits no aliens. After two hundred years of unbroken residence, perhaps a family from another district may be adopted, but in the eyes of the aboriginal race they remain newcomers. Prefects and administrators tried to tame these ancient families; they would accept invitations but refused to admit strangers into their houses. Ready to scoff, jealous and niggardly, marrying only among themselves, they formed a serried phalanx to keep out intruders. Of modern luxury they had no notion; sending a boy to Paris was thought certain ruin. Such sagacity measures their old-world manners—thick-headed Royalism infected with bigotry rather than zeal, stagnating like their town on a rock. Yet Angoulême had a regional reputation for education, and neighbors sent daughters to its boarding schools and convents.

It is easy to see the influence of class feeling that held Angoulême aloof from L’Houmeau. The merchant classes are rich, the noblesse usually poor. Each side took revenge in scorn; tradespeople espoused the quarrel. “He is a man of L’Houmeau!” a shopkeeper of the upper town would say of a lower-town merchant, with an accent words cannot describe. When the Restoration defined the noblesse’s position, holding out hopes realizable only by topsy-turvydom, the distance between Angoulême and L’Houmeau widened further. The better families, all devoted to the Government, grew more exclusive. “The man of L’Houmeau” became little better than a pariah. Hence the deep, smothered hatred that later erupted in the insurrection of 1830 and destroyed durable social elements in France. As the Court nobles’ overweening haughtiness detached the provincial noblesse from the throne, so these last alienated the bourgeoisie from the royal cause by conduct that galled their vanity.

So a “man of L’Houmeau,” a druggist’s son, in Mme. de Bargeton’s house amounted to a little revolution. Who was responsible? The likes of Lamartine, Victor Hugo, Casimir Delavigne, Canalis, Béranger, Chateaubriand, and many other literary names—Liberals and Royalists alike—shared the blame. Mme. de Bargeton loved art and letters—an eccentric taste much deplored in Angoulême. In justice to the lady it is necessary to sketch the history of a woman born to shine, left by unlucky circumstances in the shade, a woman whose influence decided Lucien’s career.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
M. de Bargeton descended from an alderman of Bordeaux named Mirault, ennobled under Louis XIII for long service. His son, Mirault de Bargeton, became an officer under Louis XIV and married a large fortune; by Louis XV’s reign his son abandoned the Mirault name and was known simply as M. de Bargeton. That descendant wasted the family wealth and checked its fortunes. Two of his brothers, great-uncles of the present Bargeton, returned to business, so the Mirault name survives among Bordeaux merchants. The lands of Bargeton in Angoumois, in the barony of Rochefoucauld, were entailed, and the house in Angoulême, the Hôtel Bargeton, likewise; these passed to the grandson of the spendthrift, though the Revolution of 1789 stripped him of seignorial rights, leaving only rents of about ten thousand francs a year. Had his ancestor followed the course of his illustrious forebears, Bargeton V—who might be nicknamed Bargeton the Mute—would by right have borne the title Marquis of Bargeton, allied to great families and perhaps become a duke and peer. Instead, in 1805 he thought himself fortunate to marry Mlle. Marie-Louise-Anaïs de Nègrepelisse, the daughter of a noble reduced to a modest manor. The Nègrepelisses were an old southern family, with the elder branch bearing the name d’Espard since Henri Quatre; Naïs’s father, the younger son of a younger son, lived off his wife’s small estate near Barbezieux, tilling his land, selling his grain, distilling brandy, and piling up coin while laughing at detractors.

Out in that remote region, unusual circumstances shaped Mme. de Bargeton’s tastes for music and reading. During the Revolution the Abbé Niollant, the best pupil of Abbé Roze, took refuge at the manor-house of Escarbas, bringing musical compositions and undertaking Anaïs’s education. Without him she might have been left to herself or to a coarse servant. The Abbé was a musician and widely read in Italian and German; he taught her languages, counterpoint, literature, the music of great composers, Latin and Greek, and some natural science. He was an enthusiast and a poet with an artistic temperament, broad views, and a liberty of judgment that, in society, can be pardoned by depth and originality but in private life may lead to missteps. His high spirit and goodness infected Anaïs, whose solitary country life made her vulnerable: she learned fearless criticism and quick judgment without understanding their disadvantages for a woman destined to domesticity. Though the Abbé urged modesty and graciousness commensurate with her attainments, Anaïs acquired an excellent opinion of herself and a robust contempt for ordinary people. With no one to challenge or temper her, she grew haughty, not possessing the charm and urbanity of a true grande dame. Vanity was inflamed by the pride of the Abbé, who saw himself in his pupil. Isolation, the narrator suggests, harms both form and spirit: without social intercourse to compel self-repression, she developed a bold manner fit only for adventurous women; these asperities would have been softened in higher society but made her ridiculous in Angoulême once her eccentric admirers ceased to adore her.

Her father, M. de Nègrepelisse, was so miserly that he would have given up his daughter’s books to save a sick bullock; he would not have given her even a few sous beyond her allowance for anything necessary. The Abbé died in 1802 before Anaïs’s marriage—a union he likely would not have counselled. The old father now found his daughter a burden, unequal to the coming rebellion against his stinginess. Naïs, with her own opinions and little inclination for marriage, shrank from submitting to the men she had met, whom she found feeble and undignified. She wanted to rule; marriage meant obedience; faced with either a life of petty obedience or flight with a worthy lover, she might prefer the latter.

Still, M. de Nègrepelisse kept sufficient sense of rank to dread a mésalliance and resolved to marry his daughter more for his peace than for her sake. He sought a noble or country gentleman—moderately clever, not inclined to meddle with trustees’ accounts, stupid and pliable enough to let Naïs have her way, willing to take her without a dowry. The father could not find a son-in-law to satisfy both his and his daughter’s conditions—until M. de Bargeton fit both. About forty, much broken by past dissipations and regarded as of feeble intellect, he had sufficient common sense to manage his fortune and enough breeding to avoid blunders in Angoulême. The father bluntly advised his daughter how to manage such a husband to secure her own freedom. Naïs accepted: married, with a chaperon, she could steer her life under the husband’s name and, possibly aided by wit and beauty, win connections in Paris. M. de Bargeton thought himself fortunate; he expected to inherit the estates his father-in-law was accumulating. To an impartial observer the marriage looked as if the father-in-law would outlive the son-in-law.

When they married, Mme. de Bargeton was thirty-six and M. de Bargeton fifty-eight—yet he looked about seventy, she hardly half her age. She still wore rose-color and let her hair hang loose. Their income remained modest—about twelve thousand francs—yet they were among the half-dozen largest fortunes in the city, excluding merchants and officials. They were obliged to remain in Angoulême until Naïs’s inheritance should fall in and take them to Paris. Meanwhile they had to be attentive to old M. de Nègrepelisse, who outlived his son-in-law. Naïs’s brilliant gifts and latent wealth profited her little: time transformed them into absurdities. The narrator explains how good qualities, when isolated in provincial life, exaggerate into folly: pride stiffens without intercourse with greater minds; enthusiasm dwindles into exaggeration upon small objects; taste corrupts in stagnant thought; passion is frittered on the infinitesimal. This leads to avarice and tittle-tattle, and even noble natures or potentially charming women are thwarted by provincial narrowness.

Mme. de Bargeton, for instance, played the lyre at every trifle and published her emotions to her small circle. She used high-sounding, exaggerated phrases, squandering superlatives on the smallest things; she coined and relished neologisms to express her whims. She threw herself into chronic admiration and disgust, palpitated, swooned, and fell into ecstasies over everything: the devotion of a Sister of Charity, public executions, melodramatic novels, historical escapes, or a friend’s courageous mimicry. She invested trivial events with heroic language. She wore herself out with constant passion, envying exotic heroines and imagining grand destinies—tending the sick in Barcelona or sharing a seraglio with the Pasha of Janina; she adored Byron and Rousseau, and believed geniuses lived on incense and light.

While many deemed her a harmless lunatic, a subtler observer might perceive in her extravagances the fragments of a magnificent edifice left unfinished—love without a lover. This underlies her conduct: for long post-marriage years she lived on herself and distant hopes. Seeing that their modest income made life in Paris impossible, she recoiled from the men who would share her life and shuddered at the loneliness ahead. No man there could inspire that kind of madness women feel when they despair of a barren life. She had none of the chance encounters that might spark such passion; some lives admit no chance. When Napoleon’s Empire was at its height and troops left for the Peninsula, her disappointed hopes revived: she went to a ridotto and fell in love with an officer from a good family, a sub-lieutenant to whom Napoleon had hinted a Marshal’s baton. That restrained love was coldly consecrated by death: on the field of Wagram a shell shattered the portrait the Marquis of Cante-Croix had worn over his heart. For long after she wept for the young soldier whose letter placed love above Imperial favor. The grief left a sadness on her face that vanished only when age revealed her lost youth, and she saw her roses wither and longed for a last taste of love.

Her nobler qualities caused her pain as provincial coldness closed in. She might have perished of grief had she been sullied by men bent on nightly gains at cards; pride saved her from shabby intrigues. But forced to choose between empty men and an empty life, she took refuge in poetry as a Carmelite does religion. Foreign books and essayists of the Restoration warmed her solitary life but did not provide flexibility; she stood like a lightning-blasted tree, dignity become stilted manner, social supremacy turned affectation and sentimental over-refinement. She reigned over her foibles and let courtiers adore her.

This picture of Mme. de Bargeton’s past is necessary to understand Lucien’s relation to her. Into her monotony came a new interest when a newcomer, the controller of excise, arrived the previous winter. M. de Barante appointed a man whose adventurous past opened the salon of the sovereign lady where feminine curiosity held sway.

M. de Châtelet—born Sixte Châtelet, but after 1806 using the particle—was one of those agreeable young men who avoided conscription by clinging to the Imperial sun. He began as private secretary to an Imperial Highness, a post for which he had many outward qualifications: personable and well-made, clever at billiards, a passable amateur actor, a good dancer, skilled in physical exercises, able to sing a ballad and praise a joke. Supple, envious, never at a loss, there was nothing he did not seem to know—though he truly knew little. He could sit at the piano and accompany a woman, manufacture a flat quatrain, fill in a Princess’ needlework, sketch a landscape, copy a head in profile, or design a costume. Such small talents were useful where women exerted influence. He professed diplomacy—the refuge of the shallow, where discretion allows those with little knowledge to seem profound by saying nothing and looking wise. He was made a Baron, went to Cassel as envoy-extraordinary, and was used by Napoleon as a diplomatic courier; just when promised a post in Westphalia the Empire fell. Bypassed, he went to Egypt with General de Montriveau, suffered a strange chapter of accidents among Arab tribes, was sold and resold, and finally escaped via an English vessel to return to Paris before Montriveau. His misfortunes and connections recommended him to the President of the Council, who placed him in M. de Barante’s department until a controllership opened. Thus Châtelet, with the Princess’ story, his reputation with women, and his travels, fascinated Angoulême’s ladies.

Baron Sixte du Châtelet adopted the manners of upper town and took his cue. He posed as a jaded man of the world, broken in health and weary, constantly raising his hand to his forehead to suggest perpetual pain and interesting travels. He was on visiting terms with the general, the prefect, the receiver-general, and the bishop, but in every house he was frigidly polite and slightly supercilious—like a man out of place awaiting favors. He left his social talents to conjecture; they lost nothing in reputation. When curiosity about him stirred, he reconnoitred men and found them nothing, while studying the women in the cathedral for several Sundays; he saw Mme. de Bargeton as the person to be intimate with. Music, he judged, would open the doors of a house that received no strangers. Secretly procuring one of Miroir’s Masses, he learned it on the piano and one Sunday played the organ as all Angoulême went to cathedral, sending those ignorant into ecstasies and letting his name slip out. Coming out after mass, Mme. de Bargeton complimented him, regretting she had no opportunity for duets; in an interview she sought, he received the passport he could not have obtained by asking.

Thus the adroit Baron entered the queen of Angoulême’s circle and lavished attention. The elderly beau—he was forty-five—perceived her dormant youth ready to revive; he saw treasures to be turned to account, perhaps a rich widow to wed and possible connections in Paris through the Nègrepelisse family and the Marquise d’Espard. Though there was mistletoe, it was a fair tree to cultivate: he would hang his fortunes upon it, prune and await golden fruit.

High-born Angoulême cried scandal at the introduction of such a Giaour into the sanctuary: Mme. de Bargeton’s salon was a holy place in a society intent on keeping itself unspotted. The only outsider intimate there was the bishop; the prefect saw her twice or thrice a year; the receiver-general was never received. Mme. de Bargeton went to concerts at his house but never accepted dinner invitations. Now she, who had refused the receiver-general, welcomed a mere controller of excise. Such a novelty of precedence confounded them.

Those who grasp social pettiness at every level will understand the awe with which Angoulême’s bourgeoisie regarded the Hôtel de Bargeton. From L’Houmeau the grandeur of that miniature Louvre, an Angoumoisin Hôtel de Rambouillet, gleamed at a distance; yet within it gathered all the direst intellectual poverty and decayed gentility from twenty leagues about.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Political opinion here expanded into wordy commonplaces; the Quotidienne was comparatively Laodicean in loyalty, and Louis XVIII a Jacobin. The women, for the most part, were awkward, silly, insipid, and ill-dressed; something amiss always spoiled the whole; nothing in them was complete—neither toilette nor talk, flesh nor spirit. But for his designs on Mme. de Bargeton, Châtelet could not have endured the society. Yet the manners and spirit of the noble in his ruined manor-house, and the knowledge of traditions of good breeding, covered a multitude of deficiencies. Nobility of feeling was far more real here than in the lofty world of Paris. You might compare these country Royalists to old-fashioned silver plate—antiquated and tarnished, but weighty; their attachment to the Bourbons as the Bourbons honored them. The fixity of their political opinions amounted to faithfulness. The distance they set from the bourgeoisie, their exclusiveness, gave them a certain elevation and enhanced their value.

Some women, flattered by M. du Châtelet, saw in him the superior qualities lacking in the men of their sect, and their vanity was soothed. They all hoped to succeed to the Imperial Highness. Purists thought the intruder might be seen in Mme. de Bargeton’s house, but not elsewhere. Du Châtelet endured much insolence but held his ground by cultivating the clergy and encouraging the queen of Angoulême’s rural foibles; he brought her the newest books and read aloud the poetry that appeared. They went into ecstasies over these poets—she sincerely, he with suppressed yawns—yet he bore the Romantics with a patience hardly expected of a man of the Imperial school.

Mme. de Bargeton waxed enthusiastic over the renaissance that seemed to follow the Bourbon return; she loved M. de Chateaubriand for calling Victor Hugo “a sublime child.” It depressed her that she could only know genius from afar; she sighed for Paris, where great men live. For these reasons M. du Châtelet thought he had done a clever thing when he told her that there was “another sublime child” in Angoulême, a young poet of L’Houmeau whose glory surpassed the Parisian galaxy—though the baron knew little of him. The headmaster of the school had shown du Châtelet some admirable verses, and Mme. de Bargeton, surrounded by a comic provincial circle who pretended to art and letters, received the news with rapture. A poor, humble lad—a second Chatterton in romantic outline—must be seen. Du Châtelet negotiated, through the headmaster, Lucien’s appearance in the Hôtel de Bargeton.

For provincials, class distances are greater than in Paris; behind social barriers people sit crying Raca! with mutual anathemas. So the ferment in Lucien’s heart when the headmaster told him the great gates of the Hôtel de Bargeton would open was intense. Lucien and David had often gazed up at that house and wondered whether their names would ever reach ears deaf to knowledge from lowly origin; now he was to be welcomed there.

No one except his sister suspected. Eve, thrifty housekeeper and divine magician, conjured a few louis d’or from her savings to buy thin shoes and a new suit from Angoulême’s best; she made a frill for his best shirt and washed and pleated it with her own hands. Proud and anxious, she gave him countless pieces of advice—foreseeing foolish fears: Lucien had a habit of resting his elbows on the table when deep in thought; Eve told him not to forget himself in those aristocratic precincts. She went as far as St. Peter’s Gate to see him off and watched him walk on until he vanished into the Promenade. For Eve, Lucien in Mme. de Bargeton’s house meant the dawn of success; she did not suspect that where ambition begins, ingenuous feeling often ends.

Externals in the Rue du Minage gave Lucien no surprise. The palace, large in his imagination, was built of mellow country stone and looked dismal from the street; inside it was plain and sober, almost convent-like, but in good repair. Lucien climbed an old staircase with a chestnut balustrade, crossed a shabby antechamber, and entered a little wainscoted drawing-room beyond a dim salon. The carved eighteenth-century woodwork had been painted gray; monochrome paintings ran on frieze panels, and the walls were crimson damask with a meagre border. The old-fashioned furniture shrank under red-and-white check covers. On the sofa sat Mme. de Bargeton, seen by two wax candles.

She did not rise but twisted gracefully, smiling; her manner struck the poet as distinguished. For Mme. de Bargeton he was poetry incarnate—his diffidence and beauty enchanted her. Lucien scrutinized his hostess with discreet glances; she disappointed none of his expectations. She wore a black velvet coif recalling medieval legend to a young imagination, red-gold hair escaping in curls, a massive white brow, bright gray eyes, a Bourbon curve to her nose; the careless cross-folds of her bodice left a white throat partly bare and revealed a still youthful figure. Her fingers were tapering and well kept. She pointed to a seat by her side.

M. Sixte du Châtelet ensconced himself in an easy-chair; Lucien then became aware that no one else was present. Mme. de Bargeton’s words intoxicated him. Those three hours passed like a dream he wished to prolong. She was slender, in love with love and loverless, delicate despite strength. Her foibles, exaggerated by manner, appealed to his youthful taste for hyperbole. He did not notice that her cheeks were faded or that her patches were hardened by ailing health; his imagination fastened on glowing eyes and dainty curls. Her spirit made such appeal he could no longer see her as she was. He had brought no verses, meaning to return; Mme. de Bargeton did not ask for them because she meant he should come again to read them. Was not this a beginning?

M. Sixte, however, was not well pleased. He perceived too late that he had a rival in this handsome young fellow. He accompanied Lucien downstairs to the first flight of steps below Beaulieu to practice diplomacy; Lucien was astonished when the controller of excise, who had effected the introduction, proceeded to give him advice.

“Heaven send that Lucien might meet with better treatment than he has,” du Châtelet discoursed. “The Court was less insolent than this pack of dolts in Angoulême. You were expected to endure deadly insults; the superciliousness you had to put up with was abominable. If this kind of folk did not alter behavior, there would be another Revolution of ‘89. As for myself, if I continued to go to the house, it was because I had found Mme. de Bargeton to my taste; she was the only woman worth troubling about in Angoulême; I had been paying court to her for want of better, and now I was desperately in love. She would be mine before long; she loved me—everything pointed that way. The conquest of this haughty queen would be my revenge on the whole houseful of booby clodpates.”

Châtelet spoke as one who would destroy a rival, pressing down upon the poor poet with self-importance. He grew taller as he embellished tales of his wanderings; while he impressed the poet’s imagination, the lover was not afraid.

Despite the coxcomb, Lucien returned again and again to the house—not too often at first, as a man of L’Houmeau should; but he soon grew used to the condescension, and came more frequently. The druggist’s son was a completely insignificant being. When noblesse called on Naïs and found Lucien present, they received him with the overwhelming graciousness well-bred people use toward inferiors. Lucien thought them kind, and later detected their patronizing tone, which stirred his gall and confirmed a bitter Republicanism—a phase many would-be patricians pass through en route to polite society.

But was there anything he would not endure for Naïs?—for so he heard her named. Like Spanish grandees and old Viennese nobility, these folk called each other by Christian names, a final shade of distinction in Angoumoisin aristocracy.

Lucien loved Naïs as a young man loves the first woman who flatters him. Naïs prophesied great things and boundless fame for Lucien. She used her skill to secure her hold: she exalted him beyond measure and represented him to himself as a child without fortune she meant to start in life; she treated him like a child to keep him near; she made him her reader, her secretary, and cared more for him than she would have thought possible after her calamity.

She tortured herself over the folly of loving a young man of twenty, socially apart; her behavior was a bewildering mix of familiarity and capricious pride born of fears and scruples. She was sometimes a lofty patroness, sometimes tender and flattering. At first, while overawed by her rank, Lucien felt dread, hope, despair—the torture of first love—beaten into the heart by alternating bliss and anguish. For two months Mme. de Bargeton was a benefactress who took a mother’s interest; then confidences came. She began to address her poet as “dear Lucien,” then simply “dear.” Lucien grew bolder and called her Naïs; she reproached him for using a name in everybody’s mouth. For him she would be “Louise.” Lucien was in the third heaven.

One evening Lucien found Mme. de Bargeton looking at a portrait, which she promptly put away. He wished to see it; to quiet his jealousy she showed him Cante-Croix’s picture and told, with tears, the piteous story of a love stainless but cruelly cut short. Was she experimenting? Practicing first unfaithfulness to the dead? Or preparing a rival? Lucien, too inexperienced to analyze, gave way to despair when she raised scruples about duty or appearances—the redoubts women love to have carried by storm. On the guileless Lucien these coquetries failed; he would have advanced of his own accord.

“I shall not die for you, I will live for you,” he cried; he meant to have no more of M. de Cante-Croix and gave Louise a glance that told a crisis was at hand.

Startled at the progress of their love, Louise demanded some verses promised for the first page of her album, seeking a pretext for quarrel in his tardiness. But when she read the following stanzas—naturally she considered them finer than Canalis—she changed:

  The magic brush, light flying flights of song—
  To these, but not to these alone, belong
    My pages fair;
  Often to me, my mistress’ pencil steals
  To tell the secret gladness that she feels,
    The hidden care.

  And when her fingers, slowlier at the last,
  Of a rich Future, now become the Past,
    Seek count of me,
  Oh Love, when swift, thick-coming memories rise,
    I pray of Thee.
  May they bring visions fair as cloudless skies
  Of happy voyage o’er a summer sea!

“Was it really I who inspired those lines?” she asked.

The doubt this coquetry suggested brought tears to Lucien’s eyes; but her first kiss upon his forehead calmed him. Decidedly Lucien was a great man to her; she meant to form him; she thought of teaching him Italian and German and perfecting his manners—pretexts sufficient for having him constantly under the eyes of her courtiers. She resumed music for his sake, revealed the world of sound by playing Beethoven till she sent him into ecstasy; and, happy in his delight, turned to the half-swooning poet.

“Is not such happiness as this enough?” she asked; poor Lucien answered, “Yes.”

The week before, things had reached a point where Louise asked Lucien to dine with M. de Bargeton as a third. Yet the town knew. The outcry was terrific. Some said society faced cataclysm. “See what comes of Liberal doctrines!” others cried.

Then jealous du Châtelet discovered that Madame Charlotte, the monthly nurse, was none other than Mme. Chardon, “the mother of the Chateaubriand of L’Houmeau,” as he put it. The remark passed as a joke. Mme. de Chandour first hurried to Mme. de Bargeton.

“Naïs, dear,” she said, “do you know what everybody is talking about in Angoulême? This little rhymster’s mother is the Madame Charlotte who nursed my sister-in-law two months ago.”

“What is extraordinary in that, my dear?” replied Mme. de Bargeton with regal air. “She is a druggist’s widow, is she not? A poor fate for a Rubempré. Suppose you and I had not a penny, what should either of us do? How would you support your children?”

Mme. de Bargeton’s presence of mind quelled the jeremiads. Great natures make a virtue of misfortune; there is something irresistibly attractive about persevering well-doing under evil report. Innocence has the piquancy of the forbidden.

That evening Mme. de Bargeton’s rooms were crowded with friends who came to remonstrate. She brought her caustic wit into play. She said that since noble families could not produce a Molière, a Racine, a Rousseau, a Voltaire, a Massillon, a Beaumarchais, or a Diderot, people must accept that great men had upholsterers and clockmakers and cutlers for fathers. Genius was always noble. She railed at boorish squires for their ignorance, talked nonsense to illuminate dull heads, and left her audience agape at her eccentricity. In these ways she conjured away the storm.

When Lucien, obedient to her request, appeared in the faded great drawing-room where whist-tables were set out, she welcomed him graciously and brought him forward like a queen who means to be obeyed. She addressed the controller of excise as “M. Châtelet,” leaving that gentleman thunderstruck by the discovery she knew of his illegal pretensions to a particle. Lucien was thrust upon her circle and received as a poisonous element everyone vowed to expel with the antidote of insolence.

Naïs had won a victory but lost supremacy. Rumor of insurrection spread. Amélie, Mme. de Chandour, following “M. Châtelet’s” counsel, resolved to erect a rival altar by receiving on Wednesdays. Mme. de Bargeton’s salon had been open every evening; those who frequented it were wedded to the routine and to the mistress. “All resigned themselves to endure the songster of the sacred grove,” said Alexandre de Brébian. Finally the president of the agricultural society ended the sedition by remarking that before the Revolution the greatest nobles admitted men like Dulcos, Grimm, and Crébillon—nobodies like this little poet of L’Houmeau; but one thing they never did: they never received tax-collectors, and, after all, Châtelet is only a tax-collector.

Du Châtelet suffered for Chardon. Everyone turned the cold shoulder upon him; Châtelet felt attacked. When Mme. de Bargeton called him “M. Châtelet,” he swore he would possess her; he then sided with the mistress, supported the young poet, and declared himself Lucien’s friend. The great diplomatist, overlooked by the shortsighted Emperor, made much of Lucien and declared himself his friend! To launch the poet into society he gave a dinner, inviting authorities—the prefect, the receiver-general, the colonel of the garrison, the head of the Naval School, the president of the Court, and so forth. The poet was fêted so magnificently and belauded so highly that anybody but a young man of twenty-two would have suspected a hoax. After dinner Châtelet induced him to recite The Dying Sardanapalus; the headmaster applauded with both hands and vowed Jean-Baptiste Rousseau had done nothing finer. Sixte, Baron du Châtelet, thought this slip of a rhymster would wither in a hothouse of adulation; perhaps he hoped the poet’s head would turn and he would thus be ruined. Pending genius’s decease, Châtelet offered up his hopes at Mme. de Bargeton’s feet; but with the ingenuity of a rake he kept his plan in abeyance, watching the lovers and waiting for the chance to ruin Lucien.

From this time vague rumors reported a great man in Angoumois. Mme. de Bargeton was praised for her interest in this young eagle. No sooner was her conduct approved than she sought general sanction. She announced a soirée with ices, tea, and cakes—a great innovation in a city where tea was sold only by druggists as medicine. The flower of Angoumoisin aristocracy was summoned to hear Lucien read. Louise admitted hidden difficulties but let fall words about the social cabal formed against him; she would not have him ignorant of perils to his career, nor of obstacles insurmountable to weaklings. She drew a lesson from the recent victory. Her white hands pointed him to glory beyond prolonged martyrdom; she spoke of stakes and flaming pyres, decorated her speech with pompous epithets. The rhetoric, borrowed from Corinne, served to make Louise seem greater and to exalt the Benjamin who inspired her eloquence.

She counselled him to renounce his patronymic for the noble name of Rubempré; he need not mind the tittle-tattle over a change which the King would authorize. Mme. de Bargeton undertook to procure this favor; she was related to the Marquise d’Espard, a Blamont-Chauvry before marriage and a personage at Court. The words “King,” “Marquise d’Espard,” and “the Court” dazzled Lucien like fireworks; baptism into a noble name seemed necessary.

“Dear child,” said Louise, with tender mockery, “the sooner it is done, the sooner it will be sanctioned.”

She traversed social strata and showed the poet that this step would raise him many rungs. Seizing the moment, she persuaded Lucien to forswear the chimerical notions of ‘89 about equality; she roused a thirst for social distinction, quelling David’s cool commonsense; she pointed to fashionable society as the only stage for his talent. The rabid Liberal became a Monarchist in petto; Lucien set his teeth in the apple of desire for rank, luxury, and fame. He swore to win a crown to lay at his lady’s feet, even if there should be blood on the bays. He would conquer at any cost. To prove his courage, he told her of his present life—its hardships, shackles of poverty borne with pride, days of work for David, nights of study. His ardor recalled the colonel of six-and-twenty; Mme. de Bargeton’s eyes grew soft; Lucien seized a hand she abandoned and kissed it with the frenzy of a lover and a poet. Louise even allowed him to press his lips on her forehead.

“Oh, child! child! if any one should see us, I should look very ridiculous,” she said, shaking off the ecstatic torpor.

That evening Mme. de Bargeton’s wit assailed Lucien’s prejudices. Men of genius, she argued, had neither brothers nor sisters nor father nor mother; their tasks demanded sacrifice of everything to grow to full stature. Families might suffer from a giant brain’s all-absorbing exactions at first, but later be repaid a hundredfold; they would share the spoils of victory. Genius was accountable to no man; genius alone could judge means to an end which no one else could know. A man of genius might set himself above law, reconstruct law, take what he needed, run any risks, for all is his. She quoted Bernard Palissy, Louis XI., Fox, Napoleon, Columbus, Julius Caesar—world-famous gamblers who began life hampered by debt or poverty, misunderstood, reviled as bad sons or brothers, yet became pride of family and country.

Her arguments fell on fertile soil in the worst of Lucien’s nature and spread corruption in his heart; for him, when desires were hot, all means seemed admissible. But failure is high treason against society; when the fallen conqueror runs amuck through bourgeois virtues and pulls down society’s pillars, society drives him forth in abhorrence. Unconsciously Lucien stood with genius’s palm on one hand and a shameful ending in the hulks on the other; on Sinai of the prophets he beheld no Dead Sea covering the cities of the plain—the hideous winding-sheet of Gomorrah.

So well did Louise loosen provincial swaddling-bands that the poet resolved on an experiment upon her. He wished to be certain this proud conquest was his without risking a rebuff. The forthcoming soirée gave him opportunity. Ambition blended with love. He loved and meant to rise—a double desire natural in young men with a heart to satisfy and life’s battle to fight. Society, summoning all her children to one banquet, arouses ambition early. Youth is robbed of its charm and generous thoughts corrupted by mercenary scheming. The idealist would fain it otherwise, but intrusive fact too often disproves our fiction. Lucien imagined his scheming was prompted by good feeling and persuaded himself it was for David’s sake.

He wrote a long letter to his Louise; pen in hand he felt bolder than face to face. In a dozen sheets, copied three times, he told her of his father’s genius and blighted hopes and of his grinding poverty. He described his sister as an angel, and David as another Cuvier, a great man of the future, father, friend, and brother to him in the present. He declared he should feel unworthy of Louise’s love if he did not ask her to do for David what she had done for him. He would give up everything rather than desert David Séchard; David must witness his success. It was one of those wild letters where a young man levels a pistol at refusal—full of boyish casuistry and the incoherent reasoning of an idealist; a delicious tissue of words embroidered by naive utterances women love—unconscious revelations of the writer’s heart.

Lucien left the letter with the housemaid, went to the office, and spent the day reading proofs, supervising orders, and attending to the printing-house. He said nothing to David. While youth bears a child’s heart, it is capable of sublime reticence. Perhaps Lucien feared David’s clear-sighted eyes that read the depths of his soul. But when he read Chénier’s poems with David, his secret rose from his heart at the sting of a reproach he felt as the patient feels the probing of a wound.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
And now try to understand the thoughts that troubled Lucien as he went down from Angoulême. Was the great lady angry with him? Would she receive David? Had he, in his ambition, flung himself back into the depths of L’Houmeau? Before he kissed Louise’s forehead he had measured the distance between a queen and her favorite; so far had he come in five months, though he did not think David could cross the same ground in a moment. He did not yet grasp how completely the lower orders were excluded from that upper world; he did not suspect that a second experiment of this kind would mean ruin for Mme. de Bargeton. Once accused and fairly convicted of liking canaille, Louise would be driven from her circle as men shunned a leper. Naïs might have broken moral law and been defended by clergy and aristocracy, but admitting all sorts of people to her house was an unforgivable sin. The sins of those in power are overlooked; once they abdicate, they pay the penalty. And what was it but abdication to receive David?

Lucien’s aristocratic instinct found other difficulties. A fine manner is not always a sign of noble feeling: great men sometimes look commonplace; knowledge of the world, when not inherited, is acquired by education and fortunate gifts—a graceful figure, distinguished features, a certain ring in the voice. David lacked those trifles that Nature had given Lucien. Lucien, of gentle blood on his mother's side and a high-arched foot, could hear jokes at David’s expense; David had his father the pressman’s physique and a flat Gael’s foot. Lucien pictured Mme. de Bargeton’s repressed smile and, without feeling exactly ashamed of his friend, resolved to disregard his first impulse and think twice before repeating such risks.

So, after the hour of poetry and self-sacrifice, after the reading of verse that opened literature like a newly risen sun, the hour of worldly wisdom and scheming struck for Lucien.

Back in L’Houmeau he wished he had not written that letter; he wished he could take it back; for down the vista of the future he caught sight of the inexorable laws of the world. He guessed that nothing succeeds like success, and it cost him something to step down from the first rung of the ladder by which he meant to storm the heights. Pictures of his simple life rose before him—David, generous and self-sacrificing; his mother, proud in her lowly lot; his sister submissive and gracious; his unspoiled conscience and budding hopes—and the past broke into flowers.

Then he told himself it was finer to hew his own way through hostile mobs of aristocrats and philistines by repeated strokes than to reach the goal through a woman’s favor. Sooner or later his genius would shine; others had tamed society. Women would love him when that day came. Napoleon’s example—fueling ordinary persons’ aspirations—occurred to him. He flung his schemes to the winds and blamed himself. Lucien was quick to shift between extremes.

Lucien had none of the scholar’s love for retreat; for a month he had felt shame at the shop front reading—

POSTEL (LATE CHARDON), PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMIST,

in yellow letters on green. It offended him that his father’s name should be posted where every carriage passed.

Every evening, closing the ugly iron gate and going up to Beaulieu to give his arm to Mme. de Bargeton among the dandies, he chafed at the disparity between his lodging and his fortune.

“I love Mme. de Bargeton; perhaps soon she will be mine, yet here I live in this rat-hole!” he thought as he went down the narrow passage into the little yard behind the shop. Bundles of boiled herbs lay along the wall, the apprentice scoured a caldron, and M. Postel, girded in a laboratory apron with a retort in hand, inspected some chemical product while watching the shop door or listening for the bell.

A strong scent of camomile and peppermint pervaded the yard and the poor little dwelling reached by a short ladder with ropes for handrails. Lucien’s room was an attic under the roof.

“Good-day, sonny,” said M. Postel, that provincial tradesman. “Are you pretty middling? I have just been experimenting on treacle, but it would take a man like your father to find what I am looking for. Ah! he was a famous chemist, he was! If I had only known his gout specific, you and I should be rolling along in our carriage this day.”

The little druggist, thick-headed but kind, never failed to allude to Chardon senior’s unlucky secrecy about a discovery—words that stabbed Lucien.

“It is a great pity,” Lucien answered curtly. He began to find Postel vulgar, though he blessed the man for his kindness; honest Postel had helped his master’s widow and children more than once.

“Is there a letter for me?”

“Yes, a letter that smells like balm! it is lying on the corner near my desk.”

Mme. de Bargeton’s letter lying among physic bottles in a druggist’s shop! Lucien sprang in to rescue it.

“Be quick, Lucien! your dinner has been waiting an hour!” a sweet voice called through a half-opened window; but Lucien did not hear.

“That brother of yours has gone crazy, mademoiselle,” said Postel, lifting his face.

The old bachelor looked like a miniature brandy-cask; at the sight of Eve his expression became ceremonious and amiable, plainly showing thoughts of espousing his predecessor’s daughter, though love and interest warred in his heart. He often said to Lucien, “Your sister is uncommonly pretty, and you are not so bad looking neither! Your father did everything well.”

Eve was tall, dark-haired, blue-eyed; though showing signs of virile character, she was gentle, tender-hearted, and devoted. Her frank innocence, simplicity, quiet acceptance of a hard life, and spotless character won David Séchard’s heart. Since they first met a repressed, single-hearted love had grown between them in the German fashion—quietly, with no fervid protestations. In secret they thought of each other as if barred by something jealous; they hid feelings as if it wronged Lucien. David had no confidence and could not believe Eve could care for him; Eve, penniless, was shy. She was proud, not vain, and would not advance toward the son of a father said to be rich. Some said the vineyard at Marsac was worth more than eighty thousand francs; old Séchard had savings and bought bits of land as they came. Perhaps David alone knew nothing of his father’s wealth. To him Marsac was a hovel bought in 1810 for fifteen or sixteen thousand francs, seen once a year at vintage time when his father boasted—David cared little.

David was a student leading a solitary life; his love, nurtured in solitude, was timid and sought encouragement. He stood in awe of Eve and was awkward and eager to hurry away. He repressed his passion and was silent. Often he would leave the Place du Mûrier and go through the Palet Gate to L’Houmeau, but the green iron railings made his heart fail and he turned back. Eve read clearly what little he showed; she was proud of his deep reverence, but it was his enthusiastic belief in Lucien that drew her most. The mute delights of their love were like wildflowers to garden blooms: glances like water-flowers, words vanishing like briar scents, melancholy tender as moss—blossoms of two rare natures springing from rich soil on rock foundations. Eve had seen the strength beneath David’s weakness and made allowance, so a single word might bind them closer.

Eve opened the door, and Lucien sat at the little X-shaped trestle table. There was no tablecloth; the household had but three silver spoons and forks, and Eve laid them all for the dearly loved brother.

“What have you there?” she asked when she had set a dish and put the extinguisher on the portable stove.

Lucien did not answer. Eve set a little plate garnished with vine-leaves and a jug of cream.

“There, Lucien, I have had strawberries for you.”

But Lucien was absorbed in his letter. Eve sat beside him without murmur; in a sister’s love there is pleasure to be treated without ceremony.

“Oh! what is it?” she cried as she saw tears in his eyes.

“Nothing, nothing, Eve,” he said, and putting his arm about her, he drew her close and kissed her forehead, hair, throat with surprising warmth.

“You are keeping something from me.”

“Well, then—she loves me.”

“I knew very well that you kissed me for somebody else,” Eve pouted, flushing.

“We shall all be happy,” cried Lucien, swallowing great spoonfuls of soup.

“We?” echoed Eve, with the same presentiment that had crossed David’s mind. “You will not care so much about us now.”

“How can you think that, if you know me?”

Eve clasped his hand, carried off the empty plate and brought the dish she had made. Lucien read his letter again instead of eating; Eve, discreet, respected his silence. Here is the letter in essence: Mme. de Bargeton would not refuse help to David, whom Lucien had praised, but she knew the prejudices of her set; she would like to see the friend first and decide whether Lucien was right. She framed her consent as conditional, from a mother's anxious care for her poet.

Lucien had no suspicion of the art with which polite society puts forward a “Yes” on the way to a “No,” and a “No” that leads to a “Yes.” He took the note for a victory. David should go to Mme. de Bargeton’s house! David would shine in the majesty of his genius! He raised his head proudly; his face radiated hope, and Eve told him he looked handsome.

“If that woman has any sense, she must love you! And if so, to-night she will be vexed, for all the ladies will try all sorts of coquetries on you. How handsome you will look when you read your Saint John in Patmos! If only I were a mouse, and could just slip in and see it! Come, I have put your clothes out in mother’s room.”

The mother’s room testified to self-respecting poverty: white curtains, a strip of cheap green carpet, a chest of drawers, a looking-glass, a few walnut chairs. A clock on the chimney-piece told of vanished prosperity. Eve’s adjoining closet had room for a narrow bed, a low chair, and a work-table; the door always stood open for air. Though these things spoke of poverty, the atmosphere was sedate and studious, suitable for those who knew the mother and children.

Lucien was tying his cravat when David’s step sounded in the little yard. The young printer appeared in a hurry.

“Well, David!” cried Lucien, “we have gained the day! She loves me! You shall come too.”

“No,” David said with confusion, “I came to thank you, but I have been thinking seriously. My life is cut out for me, Lucien. I am David Séchard, printer to His Majesty in Angoulême, my name on bills posted on every wall. For people of that class, I am an artisan, a craftsman who lives over a shop in the Rue de Beaulieu at the corner of the Place du Mûrier. I have not the wealth of a Keller nor the name of a Desplein—powers the nobles ignore. How can I prove my claim to this sudden elevation? I should only make myself a laughing-stock for nobles and bourgeoisie alike. As for you, your position is different. A foreman is not committed. You are gaining knowledge indispensable for later; you can explain your present work by your future. You can leave your place tomorrow and begin something else; nobody has pigeon-holed you. Take advantage of your social maiden fame to walk alone and grasp honors. Enjoy all pleasures. I wish you luck; I shall enjoy your success; you will be like a second self. Yes, in my mind I shall live your life. You shall have the holiday life; I will lead the tradesman’s life of sober toil, patient scientific research.

“You shall be our aristocracy,” he continued, looking at Eve. “If you totter, I will steady you. If you suffer treachery, find refuge in our hearts; love there will never change. Influence and favor might fail us if we were two; we should stand in each other’s way; go forward, you can tow me after you if it comes to that. I shall dedicate my life to yours. The thing you did—risked losing your benefactress, your love perhaps, rather than forsake me—that little thing was so great—ah, well, Lucien, that alone would bind me to you forever if we were not brothers already. Have no remorse; be not concerned about seeming to take the larger share. This one-sided bargain is exactly to my taste. Suppose you give me a pang now and again, who knows that I shall not be your debtor all my life?”

He glanced timidly at Eve; her eyes were full of tears; she saw all beneath the surface.

“In fact,” he added, “you are well made, you have a graceful figure, you wear your clothes with an air, you look like a gentleman in that blue coat with yellow buttons and plain nankeen trousers; I should look like a workingman among those people, awkward and out of my element, or say foolish things—or say nothing. But you can take your mother’s name; call yourself Lucien de Rubempré; I am and shall be David Séchard. Everything tells for you there and against me. Women will worship that angel face of yours; won’t they, Eve?”

Lucien sprang up and flung his arms about David. David’s humility had dispelled many doubts. Was it possible not to be tender towards a friend who, in friendship, thought the very thoughts ambition suggested? The aspirant for love and honors felt the way smoothed; the young comrade felt his whole heart go out.

It was one of those rare moments when forces in us are sweetly strung and every chord gives full resonance.

Yet this noble goodness increased Lucien’s human tendency to take himself as the center. Don’t we all say, “L’État, c’est moi!”? Lucien’s mother and sister concentrated tenderness on him, David was devoted; he had all the faults of a spoiled eldest son. Their unselfishness fostered egoism in him; Mme. de Bargeton was doing her best to develop the same fault by inciting him to forget his sister, mother, and David. He was far from doing so yet; but there was ground to fear that as his sphere widened his thought would be how to maintain himself in it.

When emotion subsided, David suggested Lucien’s poem Saint John in Patmos might be too biblical for such an audience. For his first appearance before the exacting Charente public, Lucien seemed nervous. David advised him to take André de Chénier and substitute certain pleasure for dubious delight. Lucien was a perfect reader; the listeners would enjoy him, and his modesty would serve him. Like most young people, the pair endowed the world with their own intelligence and virtues; youth not yet gone astray is pitiless for others’ sins and magnanimous in faith.

The power of appreciating poetry is rare in France; esprit dries up the source of sacred ecstasy; nobody cares to decipher the sublime. Lucien was about to have his first experience of worldlings’ ignorance and indifference. He went by the printing office for David’s volume.

The two lovers were left alone, and David had never felt more embarrassed. Countless terrors seized him; he half wished, half feared Eve would praise him; he longed to run away, for modesty is not exempt from coquetry. He was afraid to utter a word that might seem to beg for thanks; everything he could think of put him in a false position, so he held his tongue and looked guilty. Eve guessed his agony and enjoyed the pause; when David wrung his hat as if to go, she smiled.

“Monsieur David,” she said, “if you are not going to Mme. de Bargeton’s, we can spend the time together. It is fine; shall we take a walk along the Charente? We will have a talk about Lucien.”

David longed to fling himself at her feet. Eve’s tone solved the difficulties: her suggestion was better than praise; it was the first grace given by love.

“But give me time to dress!” she said as David made to go.

David went out; he, who had never known one tune from another, hummed. Honest Postel heard him and suspected Eve’s feelings for the printer.

Small things that evening made a great impression on Lucien; his character was peculiarly susceptible to first impressions. Like all inexperienced lovers, he arrived so early that Louise was not in the drawing-room; M. de Bargeton was there alone. Lucien had begun to practice the small deceits lovers pay for married happiness—deceits through which a woman learns her power—but he had not met the lady’s husband.

M. de Bargeton’s intellect was limited, poised between harmless vacancy and excessive stupidity. He was impressed with doing his duty in society; to be agreeable he adopted an opera-dancer’s smile as his sole expression. Satisfied, he smiled; dissatisfied, he smiled again. He smiled at good and evil alike; when obliged to express approval a complacent laugh reinforced the smile; otherwise he hardly spoke. A tête-à-tête embarrassed him, and he rescued himself by returning to the artless ways of childhood—thinking aloud about the smallest personal sensations. He never talked weather or commonplaces; he plunged you into intimate trivialities: “I took veal this morning to please Mme. de Bargeton, and my stomach has been uneasy since. How do you explain it?” or “I am just about to ring for a glass of eau sucrée; will you have some?”

These remarks permitted no discussion; a “Yes” or “No” and conversation fell dead. Then M. de Bargeton implored help with a gaze that said, “You were saying?” He loved bores who talked about themselves and listened with delicate interest, so twaddlers credited him with more understanding than he showed. When others could find nobody to listen they went to him, sure of his eulogistic smile. Mme. de Bargeton’s rooms were always crowded, and generally her husband felt at ease. He watched arrivals, helped his wife bring guests, lay in wait for departures to take them to the door with that eternal smile. When conversation grew lively, he stood happy and mute, planted like a swan, listening to political talk or watching card-players without notion of the game; or he walked about taking snuff to promote digestion. Anaïs was the bright side of his life; she made it unspeakably pleasant. Stretched in his armchair he watched admiringly while she played hostess. He tried to see the point in her remarks, and often succeeded only after delay; his smiles appeared like a delayed explosion. His respect for his wife almost amounted to adoration. She had drilled him into military subordination; he yielded passive obedience. “Go and call on Monsieur So-and-So,” she would say, and he went forthwith, like a soldier at command. He stood at attention in her presence and waited motionless for orders.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
There was talk of nominating the mute gentleman for a deputy. Lucien had barely begun to understand this unfathomable man; he had scarcely frequented the house long enough. M. de Bargeton, stretched full-length in his great chair, seemed to see and understand everything; his silence added to his dignity, and his figure inspired Lucien with profound awe. Imaginative natures magnify everything; Lucien took this gentleman for a formidable sphinx rather than a mere sentinel, and thought it necessary to conciliate him.

“I am the first comer,” he said, bowing with more respect than people usually showed the worthy man.

“That is natural enough,” said M. de Bargeton.

Lucien took the remark for an epigram; he imagined the lady’s husband jealous and reddened, trying to compose himself.

“You live in L’Houmeau,” said M. de Bargeton, “and people who live a long way off always come earlier than those who live near by.”

“What is the reason of that?” asked Lucien politely.

“I don’t know,” M. de Bargeton answered, relapsing into immobility.

“You have not cared to find out,” Lucien continued; “any one who could observe could discover the cause.”

“Ah!” said M. de Bargeton, “final causes! Eh! eh!...”

The conversation died; Lucien racked his brains to revive it.

“Mme. de Bargeton is dressing, no doubt,” he began, shuddering at the silliness of the question.

“Yes, she is dressing,” her husband naturally answered.

Lucien looked at the ceiling, saw the little chandelier stripped of gauze and filled with wax candles, covers removed from furniture revealing faded damask—preparations that meant something. He glanced at his boots, misgave about his costume, and fixed on a Japanese jar, trying to find a hobby of M. de Bargeton’s to humor him.

“You seldom leave the city, monsieur?” he began.

“Very seldom.”

Silence again. M. de Bargeton watched Lucien’s slightest movements like a suspicious cat; the young man’s presence disturbed him. Each was afraid of the other.

“Can he feel suspicious of my attentions?” thought Lucien; “he seems anything but friendly.”

His unease eased when the old man-servant announced “M. du Châtelet.” The Baron entered at ease, greeted Bargeton, and favored Lucien with the trendy nod the poet called purse-proud impertinence.

Sixte du Châtelet wore dazzling white trousers, pumps, thread stockings, an eyeglass with a black ribbon over a white waistcoat and a fashionable black coat. He was the faded beau his antecedents suggested: dye hiding grizzled hair and whiskers, a travel tan, and the retained air of an Imperial Highness’ charming private secretary. He inspected Lucien’s clothes from head to foot, then coolly returned his eyeglass to his pocket with a look that said, “I am satisfied.” Lucien, eclipsed by the inland revenue department’s elegance, thought his turn would come when he turned a poetic face upon the assembly; but the sharp pang of M. de Bargeton’s imagined hostility remained. The Baron seemed to bring the weight of his fortune to humiliate his poverty.

M. de Bargeton, having little to say, kept a question in reserve for emergencies.

“Well, monsieur,” he said to Châtelet, “is there anything fresh? anything people are talking about?”

“The latest thing is M. Chardon,” Châtelet said maliciously. “Ask him. Have you brought some charming poet for us?” he added, adjusting his side curl.

“I should have asked you whether I had succeeded,” Lucien answered; “you have been before me in the field of verse.”

“Pshaw!” said the Baron, “a few vaudevilles, lines for music, and my long Epistle to a Sister of Bonaparte will not hand down my name to posterity.”

At that moment Mme. de Bargeton appeared in full toilette: a Jewess’ turban with an Eastern clasp, cameos gleaming through gauze about her shoulders, short sleeves displaying bracelets. Lucien was charmed by the theatrical dress. M. du Châtelet lavished fulsome compliments that pleased her; she was glad to be praised in Lucien’s hearing but scarcely glanced at him, meeting Châtelet with a civility that kept him at a distance.

Guests began to arrive. First came the Bishop and his Vicar-General, dignified and reverend though unlike—one tall and attenuated, the other short and fat. Both were impassive; their silence and reserve were supposed to hide great intellects.

Close after them came Mme. de Chandour and her husband, Stanislas, a ci-devant young man slim at forty-five, with a sieve-like countenance. His cravat presented two menacing points, his coat-tails were awry, a cut-away waistcoat showed a swelling starched shirt fastened with massive gold studs. Exaggerated dress and talk made him almost a living caricature.

Stanislas admired himself, verified waistcoat buttons, admired his tight trousers and pointed shoes, then checked his hair in a mirror and surveyed the women with happy, flinging airs—a king of the poultry-yard—pleasant to the aristocratic circle. His eighteenth-century grossness procured success with women; his coxcomb superciliousness intrigued them and challenged M. du Châtelet.

Amélie de Chandour, short, plump, fair and dark-haired, was a poor actress; her loud voice matched her restless head, feathered or flowered. She had a flow of conversation, though asthma wheezed it away.

M. de Saintot, Astolphe, President of the Agricultural Society, tall, stout, high-colored, usually appeared with his wife Élisa, called Lili—a lady with a withered-fern face, solemn, pious, and trying at cards. Astolphe was supposed to be a scientific man; in truth he was ignorant but had compiled articles on Sugar and Brandy for a Dictionary of Agriculture by pillage of others’ work. It was believed he was writing on modern husbandry, but though he locked himself in his study mornings, he had not written much in years. If callers arrived, he contrived to be found rummaging papers, yet spent time on puerilities: reading newspapers, cutting corks, drawing on blotting-paper. He’d turn to Cicero to find anything applicable to current events and drag a quotation into conversation, prompting the remark, “Astolphe is a well of learning.” The belief in his abilities sustained itself by rumor.

After this pair came M. de Bartas, Adrien, who boomed his song in a bass voice and made prodigious musical claims. His self-conceit rested on solfeggi; he admired his singing, then talked music to the point of monomania. Animated only by that subject, he was miserable until begged to sing. After bellowing an air he strutted and accepted praise, moving from group to group for more; when compliments ceased, he returned to the song’s difficulties or extolled the composer.

M. Alexandre de Brébian produced heroic sepia sketches, disfiguring friends’ walls and spoiling albums. He and M. de Bartas arrived together, each with the other’s wife on his arm in a cross-cornered arrangement that gossip said was carried to extremes. Mesdames Charlotte de Brébian and Joséphine de Bartas—Lolotte and Fifine—both cared equally for a scarf or color reconciliation, aiming to look like Parisiennes while neglecting their homes. Their husbands availed an artist’s privilege to dress as they pleased; provincial dowdiness on them contrasted with their wives’ doll-like finery, making them like stage supernumeraries at third-rate theatre weddings.

One of the queerest figures was M. le Comte de Senonches, Jacques, a mighty hunter, lean and sunburned, haughty as a wild boar, suspicious as a Venetian, jealous as a Moor, yet intimate with M. du Hautoy—Francis, the friend of the house.

Madame de Senonches, Zéphirine, was tall and fine-looking though her complexion showed pimples of liver complaint, making her exacting. Slender and delicate, she affected languid manners but revealed passion and the consciousness that every caprice would be gratified.

Francis had given up a consulship in Valence and sacrificed diplomatic prospects to live near Zéphirine in Angoulême. He managed the household, educations, languages, and fortunes of M. and Mme. de Senonches with complete devotion. Noble, administrative, and bourgeois Angoulême had long looked askance at this perfect union of three persons, but the conjugal trinity became so pleasing that had M. du Hautoy suggested marriage, he would have seemed monstrously immoral. Mme. de Senonches had a lady companion and goddaughter, Mlle. de la Haye; her excessive attachment to Françoise de la Haye raised surmises of disquieting mysteries, and despite discrepancies in dates, people thought Françoise bore a striking likeness to Francis du Hautoy.

When “Jacques” was shooting nearby, people asked after Francis, and Jacques would discourse on his steward’s ailments and speak of his wife in the second place. Such blindness in a jealous man amused friends who drew him out on the topic. M. du Hautoy was a finical dandy whose minute self-care degenerated into mincing affectation: he fussed about coughs, appetite, digestion, and sleep. Zéphirine made a valetudinarian of him; she doctored and coddled him, fed him delicacies, embroidered his waistcoats and handkerchiefs until he became a kind of Japanese idol. Their understanding was perfect: Zizine consulted Francis with a look; he took his ideas from her eyes. They frowned and smiled together, seeming to take counsel even before making the simplest remark.

The largest landowner was the Marquis de Pimentel; between him and his wife they had forty thousand livres and spent winters in Paris. This evening they arrived in their calèche with neighbors, the Baron and Baroness de Rastignac, their party, the Baroness’ aunt and two charming, penniless daughters carefully brought up and simply dressed to show natural loveliness.

These first families met a reception of chilling silence; respect paid them was tinged with jealousy, especially since Mme. de Bargeton paid marked attention to the guests. The two families were aloof from provincial gossip, belonged to no clique, lived quietly, and maintained dignified reserve. M. de Pimentel and M. de Rastignac were addressed by full names, and no length of acquaintance had brought their wives and daughters into Angoulême’s select coterie; both families were too near the Court to risk provincial follies.

The Prefect and the General in command arrived last, with a country gentleman who had brought a treatise on silkworms to David that morning. Evidently a mayor or canton gentleman, his fine estate sufficed for gentility; but he was unused to polite society, uneasy in his clothes, at a loss with his hands, shifting from foot to foot, half rising and sitting as people spoke to him. He seemed ready to perform menial service: obsequious, nervous, grave by turns, laughing eagerly at every joke, listening with servility, then assuming a knowing air when imagining others laughed at him. His treatise weighed on his mind; he tried repeatedly to talk silkworms but met M. de Bartas, who talked music, and M. de Saintot, who quoted Cicero, until late in the evening Mme. and Mlle. du Brossard showed sympathy.

Mme. and Mlle. du Brossard were interesting yet pitiable: as poor as they were noble, their dress betrayed carefully hidden penury. The daughter, a big, heavy seven-and-twenty, was lauded as a good pianist by her mother in the clumsiest way. Mme. du Brossard, anxious to marry off Camille, declared her child liked everything desirable—roving life, then country farmhouses—adapting to any suitor’s taste. Mother and daughter bore a pinched dignity learned from experience; they had been objects of benevolent egoism and had sounded the void beneath consoling formulas the world offers the unfortunate.

M. de Séverac, fifty-nine and a childless widower, spoke of his silkworm nurseries; Mme. du Brossard enthused, “My daughter has always been fond of animals... she will grasp anything in a moment. Did she not understand one day the inverse ratio of the squares of distances!” This remark brought the conversation between Mme. du Brossard and M. de Séverac to a glorious close after Lucien’s reading that night.

A few habitués slipped in, as did one or two eldest sons: shy, mute young men tricked out in jewelry, highly honored by an invitation to the literary solemnity; the boldest chatted with Mlle. de la Haye. The women arranged themselves in a circle, the men stood behind them. It was a quaint assemblage of wrinkled faces and heterogeneous costumes but very alarming to Lucien; his heart beat fast under everyone’s look. Mme. de Bargeton welcomed illustrious Angoulême personages with ostentatious courtesy, but the uncomfortable feeling was aggravated by a trifling matter that would shock a young man unused to the world. Lucien noticed that no one except Louise, M. de Bargeton, the Bishop, and some few who wished to please the hostess called him M. de Rubempré; to the formidable audience he was M. Chardon. Lucien’s courage sank under inquisitive lips; he read his plebeian name in their movements and heard anticipatory criticisms in blunt provincial fashion. He had not expected such pin-pricks; it put him more out of humor with himself. Impatient to begin the reading, he hoped to assume an attitude to end his mental torment; but Jacques told Mme. de Pimentel of his sport, Adrien expounded Rossini to Mlle. Laure de Rastignac, and Astolphe, with a newspaper paragraph on a patent plow, lectured the Baron. Lucien, luckless poet, did not know there was scarce a soul in the room besides Mme. de Bargeton who could understand poetry. The matter-of-fact assembly was there by misapprehension; for the most part they did not know why they had come. Certain words—“beauty,” “glory,” “poetry”—bewitch even the coarsest intellect.

When everyone had arrived and the buzz faded after M. de Bargeton, obedient to his wife, made the circuit like a beadle tapping the pavement with his wand, securing silence at last, Lucien went to the round table near Mme. de Bargeton. A fierce thrill ran through him. He announced in an uncertain voice that, to prevent disappointment, he would read the masterpieces of a great poet discovered only recently (although André de Chénier’s poems had appeared in 1819, no one in Angoulême had heard of him). Everybody took the announcement one way—it was a shift of Mme. de Bargeton’s to save the poet’s self-love and put the audience at ease.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Lucien began with Le Malade and received a murmur of applause; but when he followed with L’Aveugle the strain proved too great for most. Only those with an artistic temperament can sympathize with such a reading. To render poetry aloud and have listeners grasp it requires devout attention and an intimate alliance between reader and audience; without that swift, subtle communication of the poet’s thought and feeling is impossible. Here that close sympathy was lacking. Lucien felt like an angel trying to sing of heaven amid the chucklings of hell. A sensitive artist knows at once whether his audience admires or fails to follow him and feels it as a plant that revives or droops. The men who had come with their wives discussed their own affairs; by acoustic law every murmur rang in Lucien’s ear; he observed gaps caused by spasmodic jaw-work and teeth that seemed to grin defiance.

Searching for any spot to rest on, he saw nothing but rows of impatient faces. Their owners were waiting for him to finish; they'd come to discuss practical questions. Except for Laure de Rastignac, the Bishop, and two or three of the younger men, they all looked bored. Those who understand poetry strive to develop its germs quickened by the poet; but this glacial audience did not even heed the letter.

Lucien felt discouraged, damp with chilly perspiration; a glowing glance from Louise gave him courage to persevere, but his poet’s heart was bleeding.

“Do you find this very amusing, Fifine?” inquired the wizened Lili.

“Don’t ask me; I cannot keep my eyes open when anyone reads aloud.”

“I hope that Naïs will not give us poetry often in the evenings,” said Francis. “If I am obliged to attend while somebody reads aloud after dinner, it upsets my digestion.”

“Poor dearie,” whispered Zéphirine, “take a glass of eau sucrée.”

“It was very well declaimed,” said Alexandre, “but I like whist better.”

After this dictum, taken as a joke on “whist,” several card-players thought the reader’s voice needed a rest, and couples slipped into the card-room. But Louise, the Bishop, and Laure besought Lucien to continue, and he caught the attention of his audience with Chénier’s spirited reactionary iambes. Several, carried away by his impassioned delivery, applauded without understanding. Such people are impressed by vociferation as a coarse palate is tickled by strong spirits.

During the interval, as they had ices, Zéphirine sent Francis to examine the volume and told Amélie the poetry was in print.

Amélie brightened. “Why, that is easily explained,” she said. “M. de Rubempré works for a printer. It's like a pretty woman making her own dresses,” she added, looking at Lolotte.

The women murmured, “He printed his poetry himself!”

“Then why does he call himself M. de Rubempré?” inquired Jacques. “If a noble takes a handicraft, he ought to lay his name aside.”

“So he did,” said Zizine, “but his name was plebeian; he took his mother’s name, which is noble.”

“Then we can read them ourselves,” said Astolphe.

This stupidity complicated matters until Sixte du Châtelet informed them that the prefatory announcement was factual, adding the poems had been written by a Royalist brother of Marie-Joseph Chénier, the Revolutionary leader. All Angoulême, except Mme. de Rastignac, her daughters, and the Bishop—who had felt the poetry’s grandeur—were mystified and offended by the hoax. A smothered murmur rose, but Lucien did not heed it. Intoxicated by the poetry, he was far from the hateful world, striving to render in speech the music filling his soul, seeing faces through a cloudy haze. He read the sombre Elegy on the Suicide, lines in the taste of a bygone day pervaded by melancholy; then he turned to the page with “Thy songs are sweet, I love to say them over,” and ended with the delicate idyll Néere.

Mme. de Bargeton sat with a hand buried in her curls, heedless of the havoc she wrought, gazing with unseeing eyes, lost in delicious dreaming; for the first time she had been transported to the sphere that was hers by right of nature. Judge how unpleasantly she was disturbed by Amélie, who expressed the general wish.

“Naïs,” Amélie broke in, “we came to hear M. Chardon’s poetry, and you are giving us poetry from a book. The extracts are nice, but the ladies prefer the native wine; they'd rather have that.”

“The French language does not lend itself very readily to poetry, does it?” Astolphe remarked to Châtelet. “Cicero’s prose is a thousand times more poetical to my mind.”

“The true poetry of France is song, lyric verse,” Châtelet answered.

“I'd very much like to hear the poetry that cost Naïs her reputation,” said Zéphirine; “but after Amélie’s request it's unlikely she'll give us a specimen.”

“She ought to have them recited in justice to herself,” said Francis. “The little fellow’s genius is his sole justification.”

“You have been in the diplomatic service,” Amélie said to M. du Châtelet, “go and manage it.”

“Nothing easier,” said the Baron.

The Princess’ private secretary, used to such manoeuvres, went to the Bishop and brought him forward. At the Bishop’s entreaty Naïs had no choice but to ask Lucien to recite his own verses, and the Baron received a languishing smile from Amélie as reward.

“Decidedly, the Baron is a very clever man,” she observed to Lolotte.

But Amélie’s earlier remark comparing women making their own dresses rankled Lolotte.

“Since when have you begun to recognize the Emperor’s barons?” she asked, smiling.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Lucien had attempted to deify his beloved in an ode, dedicated under the schoolboy title “TO HER!” and planned to recite it with an air of triumph, feeling safe beneath Mme. de Bargeton’s protection. But Mme. de Bargeton, long accustomed to evaluating company from an intellectual height, betrayed anxiety as he read. The poem spoke of an angel visiting earth to bring solace, of Love blinded by excess of light, and of a luminous pathway in heaven marking the angelic flight.

Amélie coquetted; the Baron, acting arbiter of taste, sneered that the verse was a Christianized Ossian, full of “immense, infinite, solitude, intelligence” and strained rhymes. Zéphirine found the ode obscure though the dedication clear; Francis mocked the archangel’s armor as thin gauze. The women, eager for flattering poets, professed polite enchantment while remaining inwardly cold. Lolotte ordered Adrien not to congratulate the poet; Adrien obeyed. Zéphirine declared love was a poem to be lived, not written; Stanislas agreed, flattering himself. Amélie, intent on humiliating Naïs, attacked Lucien’s origins—deriding his family’s lowly trades—and the company joined in.

Francis, seeking a public blow, contrived a subtler attack through the Bishop. He hinted to the prelate that Lucien’s mother, a modest but remarkable woman, supplied subjects for her son’s verses and that Lucien idolized her. Having planted this idea, he left the Bishop to make the intended allusion.

When Francis and the Bishop returned, the circle watched with renewed interest. Lucien, shy and unused to their manners, was embarrassed by questions and by being called alternately M. Chardon and M. de Rubempré. He misnamed M. de Senonches, provoking rude laughter and Mme. de Bargeton’s crimsoned shame. Senonches muttered displeasure; Zéphirine compared Lucien to M. de Cante-Croix. Mme. de Bargeton philosophized about glory and women drawn to greatness; the Marquise laughed and sided with Naïs. The company treated Lucien like a curiosity; Lolotte asked if he worked as quickly as a joiner making a box.

Stung, Lucien took courage from Mme. de Bargeton’s blunt defense: poetry did not grow in his head like grass in their courtyards. The Bishop, sanctifying poetry, laid a hand on Lucien’s head and declared him a poet marked by Fate. Lucien thanked him with a grateful look, unaware that the prelate would wound him next: the Bishop jested that Lucien’s “excellent mother” might assist him. The comment set off delighted smiles of caste; M. de Bargeton laughed in concert.

Mme. de Bargeton retorted that a poet who looked to the Bible for inspiration indeed had a mother in the Church, and mock-challenged Lucien to recite Saint John in Patmos or Belshazzar’s Feast—an allusion to Rome that sent the women smiling at the Latin. Lucien faltered under these blows but rose resolved to conquer this world. He prepared to declaim Saint John in Patmos; yet the card-tables called the company back to amusement. They returned to their games with contempt, leaving Lucien and Mme. de Bargeton alone.

The social world of Angoulême, conscious of its ignorance of poetry, clustered about the Pimentels and Rastignacs for verdicts; the Marquis and Marquise’s approval—“not bad for provincial poetry”—spread and grew malign. Music followed: Châtelet mangled du Bartas and Figaro; duets and schoolroom songs filled the evening. Hurt by the company’s contempt, Mme. de Bargeton withdrew to her boudoir, followed by the Bishop and Mlle. de Rastignac, who was entranced by the poetry.

Alone, Mme. de Bargeton murmured that they had not understood Lucien; she loved and repeated his songs. Lucien took comfort. She urged him to endure troubles, asserting that suffering is the price of immortality and that struggle gives the eagle room to spread its wings. She begged him to remember, when he reached greatness, minds disinherited by fate—and to sing of lives choked or unblossomed, allegories of the spirit that remembers Heaven. The Bishop likened such a theme to the Song of Songs; Laure de Rastignac suggested it; the Vicar-General declared France’s sacred poem unwritten and prophesied success for one who should write for religion. Mme. de Bargeton claimed the task for Lucien, seeing the dawn of vision in his eyes.

During this quiet talk, Amélie, Fifine, Adrien, and Francis reentered with Mme. de Rastignac to draw Naïs back for music. They gleefully told the drawing-room that M. de Rubempré was to recite Saint John in Patmos; the word “biblical” became mockery, and Lucien excused himself for a lapse. When he reappeared, no one noticed him; his poet’s halo had been plucked away. The landowners and pretentious set had no use for him; the women, jealous of Mme. de Bargeton, looked on him with icy scorn.

“So this is society!” Lucien thought as he took the long way home to L’Houmeau, walking to ease anger and to rehearse answers that had come too late. Far from disheartened, his ambition burned: like many who reach a higher sphere before they belong there, he resolved to sacrifice all to remain. As he paced toward the Bordeaux road, he imagined literary grandeur and hurried to meet his sister Eve and David.

Eve had dressed simply but becomingly; David, shy at her beauty, had resolved to speak of himself and their future. They walked in silence across the Bridge of Saint Anne along the Charente until Eve broke the pause. David, thinking of Lucien, feared Mme. de Bargeton was spoiling Lucien for hard work: she might make him her plaything or, if indifferent, break him. Lucien loved pleasure and would not endure privations required for great literary work; society would excite desires beyond his means.

Eve, undismayed, promised to work with their mother to support Lucien until success came. David then proposed: to marry Eve, give up his present life, and devote himself and any future fortune to support Lucien. He argued Lucien should not be foreman nor live in L’Houmeau; together they could keep him until he made his way to Paris. He pledged that love and the desire to help Lucien would give him the perseverance to pursue a profitable invention he had been researching—something in paper-making—if Eve would marry him and keep his confidence while he worked.

Moved, Eve confessed she had never thought of any other man. David admitted his faults and modest means and disclosed a plan based on chemistry and the paper trade. He described an economic problem since the Empire’s fall: calico and cotton had become common, making linen rags—used for durable paper—scarce and dear. Paper makers used linen and cotton rags; cotton paper is soft, creases, and dissolves in water, while linen yields durable paper. If cheap, durable paper could be made from a common vegetable fiber—like Chinese bamboo—the cost and weight of books could be drastically reduced, advancing literature and printing.

David had studied earlier experiments and recent discoveries. He told Eve how the Chinese used bamboo, how European experiments had been gradual, and how the transition from rag-based to machine-made paper had been slow. He mentioned web-paper and inventions by Robert d’Essonne and Didot-Saint-Léger and that the press longed for a substitute for linen rags because cotton predominated in England. If they could replace linen with a local vegetable fiber processed by machinery, books would be cheaper and lighter—Voltaire’s set would weigh far less—allowing wider diffusion of knowledge.

He sketched the paper-making process: rag-pickers gather rags, merchants sort and stock them, mills wash and reduce rags to pulp, strain the pulp through a mould that sets sheet size, and press and dry the paper. He recounted employment with the Didots and discussions about Chinese paper, and how the insight that the Chinese used native vegetable fiber led him to consider French reeds and other local plants. He acknowledged difficulty imitating Chinese handwork mechanically—cheap labor and hand-finishing give surface quality—but argued that an industrial replacement could revolutionize European paper-making.

As David explained, Lucien arrived, distraught. He related his humiliation—the company’s sneers, the Bishop’s epigram, the ridicule of his origins—and his fear that Mme. de Bargeton’s attachment would make her his consolation and his ruin. He believed she loved him as he loved her and would never give him up. David and Eve, absorbed in their own joyous news—their engagement and David’s plan—did not at first notice Lucien’s shock at the thought that Mme. de Bargeton might one day be Mme. de Rubempré and thereby complicate his ambitions.

David’s warm description of the planned household—first floor for his wife, second for Lucien, rooms above the shed for Mme. Chardon—reassured Lucien. His taste for a burgher life returned; the glow of the aristocratic dream faded. They walked back together, reconciled; Lucien joined in the lovers’ joy.

They returned late; Postel, uneasy, saw light in Eve’s room and asked Lucien if anything was wrong. Lucien told him that his mother had consented to Eve’s engagement; Postel slammed his window in despair that he had not earlier proposed to Mlle. Chardon.

David did not go back to Angoulême to sleep; he walked through the night to his father’s house at Marsac. At sunrise he found his father among the vines and, after a brief exchange, declared his purpose: he was to marry Eve Chardon and sought his father’s consent and permission to build a second floor and rooms above the shed to house their projected household.

The father, a practical vinegrower, was at once interested in prospects of money but skeptical. He grumbled about taxes, boasted of making more puncheons per acre, and scoffed at book-learning. He consented to the marriage but had no money to give. Assuming Eve must be rich, he hoped for funds to pay rent; when David revealed Eve had as much as his mother—i.e., nothing—his father suggested other, wealthier matches and railed at David’s education for leading him away from practical advantage. He offered to find a miller’s widow or arrange profitable marriages, but refused to expend anything on building. Though David urged him to build, the old man said he had no cash and such expenditure would be wasted. He would, however, consent to the marriage and not press the rent, leaving David to fund any improvements himself.

David left Marsac disappointed; he perceived he could not count on his father for help and that his plans must be achieved by his own means.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In Angoulême that day everyone spoke of nothing but the Bishop’s epigram and Mme. de Bargeton’s reply. By evening every detail was exaggerated and Lucien became the hero of the hour. Gossip reached the bourgeoisie; young men nodded to him as he passed through Beaulieu, and flattering asides fed his vanity.

“There is a lucky young fellow!” said Petit-Claud, an attorney’s clerk who had been at school with Lucien.

“Yes,” another answered, “he’s good-looking, has some brains, and Mme. de Bargeton is quite wild about him.”

Lucien waited impatiently to find Louise alone; he had to tell her of his sister’s marriage and to seek the mistress of his destiny. After the previous soirée Louise welcomed him with ardor that flattered the novice lover; she abandoned hand and hair to his burning kisses.

“If only you could have seen your face while you were reading,” she cried, switching to the familiar tu and wiping the poet’s brow as if setting a crown. “There were sparks in your eyes! You shall read Chénier through to me; he is the lover’s poet. You shall not be unhappy; I will make an oasis for you—a life of work and reverie. Never forget that you owe your laurels to me; that will be my guerdon for what I endure. The world will envy us, but I have lived, and my heartstrings vibrate again.”

Tears flowed; Lucien kissed her hand. Everyone soothed his vanity—his mother, his sister, David, Louise. Their indulgence, with the fury of his enemies, fixed him more firmly in an unreal world. A handsome young man with promise accepts flattery readily; only sharp lessons make him see himself as ordinary.

“My beautiful Louise, do you mean in very truth to be my Beatrice?” he asked.

Louise raised her eyes. “If you show yourself worthy—some day!” she said, smiling. “Are you not happy? To be the sole possessor of a heart, to speak freely and be understood—that is happiness.”

He pouted like a lover. She laughed and rebuked his gloom. When he confessed that David and Eve loved one another and were to be married, she dismissed his fears and made him the center of her concern: “What is your family to me? Suppose my father married his cook—would that trouble you? Lovers are for each other their whole family. Be great; win fame; that is our affair!”

This selfish reassurance made Lucien the happiest of mortals. Louise convinced him they two were alone in the world. When M. de Bargeton arrived, Lucien frowned, but Louise made him stay for dinner and to read André de Chénier aloud until the card-players came. Cajoled by Louise and her husband, waited on with the respect shown a favorite guest, Lucien remained at the Hôtel de Bargeton. He began to think of the luxuries he now enjoyed as natural to Lucien de Rubempré. He felt his position secure through Louise’s love and M. de Bargeton’s weakness, and as the rooms filled he put on a lordly air that the fair lady encouraged. He tasted the delights of despotic sway and tried that evening to assume the airs of the lion of the little town. A few noticed and drew conclusions: Amélie and others in a corner saw only deplorable facts.

“Don’t blame Naïs,” said M. du Châtelet. “Chardon mistakes a woman of the world’s civility for an advance.”

“Oh! Naïs,” Amélie taunted, “she is well pleased. A young man makes a woman young again; she acts a girl’s hesitation and does not see how ridiculous she is. Think of a druggist’s son strutting with Mme. de Bargeton.”

“Love knows no high or low degree,” Adrien hummed.

Next day every house in Angoulême discussed the supposed intimacy between M. Chardon (alias de Rubempré) and Mme. de Bargeton; though the extent of their guilt amounted to two or three kisses, the world believed the worst. Mme. de Bargeton paid for her sovereignty. Society’s erratic judgments set different standards: one glance with Lucien outweighed years of Zizine’s liaison with Francis; a hand-squeeze brought down all the thunders of the Charente upon the lovers.

David had saved a little hoard from Paris for his marriage and to build a second story above his father’s house. He built a timbered floor for Lucien to avoid straining old walls, taking pleasure in making the rooms for Eve brave and comfortable.

For the friends it was a time of unmixed happiness. Lucien tired of provincial shabbiness and sordid frugality, but bore hardship without complaint. His moody looks gave place to radiant hope. He saw a star above him and built the fabric of his future on M. de Bargeton’s favor. By September Lucien had ceased to be a printer’s foreman; he was M. de Rubempré, housed sumptuously compared with the attic in L’Houmeau where “young Chardon” had lived; he dined four times a week with Mme. de Bargeton. A friendship had grown between him and the Bishop; he went to the palace. He comforted himself for drawing thirty francs a month from his family by believing that An Archer of Charles IX., the historical romance he’d long been working on, and a volume of verse, Marguerites, would bring fame and money to repay them. Grown great in his own eyes and hearing echoes of future renown, he accepted present sacrifices with noble assurance; he smiled at poverty and relished these last days of penury.

Eve and David had put Lucien’s happiness before their own. They postponed their wedding to paint their rooms and buy furniture; Lucien’s affairs came first. No one who knew Lucien could wonder at their devotion: he was engaging, impatient, and his wishes were charmingly expressed. Such gifts of nature, which win society’s predisposition, often ruin those who bask in them. Lucien found a world ready to protect youth and good looks; many a grown child basks instead of using favor profitably. With mistaken notions of social motives, they imagine they will always meet deceptive smiles; at last the world leaves them stripped, without fortune or worth.

Eve herself wished the delay: she meant to establish their household on an economical footing. But what could two lovers refuse a brother who watched his sister at work and said, “How I wish I could sew!” David, sober and observant, shared the devotion and, since Lucien’s triumph, watched him with misgivings—fearing Lucien would look down on their homely ways. Once he tested him and saw Lucien forsake vanity for home pleasures, and concluded, “They will not spoil him for us!” The three friends and Mme. Chardon arranged picnics by the Charente—simple pleasures that cost little. On great occasions, a restaurant dinner cost as much as five francs, split between David and the Chardons. David praised Lucien’s forsaking of Mme. de Bargeton and grand dinners for country days, and the whole party made much of the great man of Angoulême.

Matters advanced; the new home was nearly ready, and David had gone to Marsac to persuade his father to attend the wedding, hoping the old man might relent and give something toward expenses. Then fell one of those small-town events that change everything.

Lucien and Louise had a spy in Châtelet, a man who watched with hatred mixed with avarice for an opportunity to make scandal. Sixte meant Mme. de Bargeton should be compromised so she would be “lost.” He posed as her humble confidant, admired Lucien in the Rue du Minage, and criticized him elsewhere. Naïs had gradually given him les petites entrées, for she no longer mistrusted the elderly admirer; but Châtelet had taken too much for granted—love remained platonic, to the despair of Louise and Lucien.

Love affairs sometimes start badly—talking instead of acting, skirmishing where they should lay siege. In provinces, minute espionage keeps houses transparent and turns innocent intercourse into scandal. The world, eager to blame, becomes the prime agent in bringing scandals about; those loudest in condemnation never consider provocation. Many women, unjustly accused and condemned, take steps only after being driven to extremity. Mme. de Bargeton was now on the verge of such a position.

Obstacles to their passion were like the bonds Lilliput used on Gulliver—trifles that made movement impossible. Mme. de Bargeton had to be visible at all times; denying herself to visitors when Lucien was with her would have seemed confession. They sat in the familiar boudoir, doors open, everything arranged with propriety. M. de Bargeton pervaded the house like a cockchafer; it never entered his head that his wife wished to be alone with Lucien. Visitors flocked in as curiosity increased; provincials delighted to thwart a growing passion. Servants came and went; any change in household ways seemed a confession. Mme. de Bargeton could not step outside without the town knowing her destination. To walk alone with Lucien out of Angoulême would have been decisive; to stay late after rooms were emptied would be commented on. Within and without, she lived in public.

Like many women carried away for the first time by passion, Louise discovered such difficulties one by one. They frightened her and the terror reacted on fond talk. Weary of living in public and pushed to extremities by snooping, she thought of Escarbas and of seeing her aged father.

Châtelet did not believe in such innocence. He lay in wait, watched Lucien into the house, and followed minutes later with M. de Chandour, the most indiscreet part of the clique. He pretended neutrality to prompt the actors. To give himself countenance he attached himself to the jealous Amélie, better to lull suspicion in Lucien and Mme. de Bargeton, who was not without perspicacity. To spy he contrived an old controversy with M. de Chandour: Châtelet said Mme. de Bargeton merely amused herself with Lucien; Stanislas de Chandour held she had not been cruel to her lover; Amélie goaded them to argument, longing to know the truth. Intimate friends dropped in during the argument. Stanislas and Châtelet vied in supporting their opinions by observation, asking every neighbor, “What do you think?” These polemics kept Mme. de Bargeton and Lucien in sight.

At length Châtelet called attention to the fact that when he went with M. de Chandour to Mme. de Bargeton’s and found Lucien there, there was nothing suspicious; the boudoir door stood open, the servants came and went, nothing to betray love. Stanislas, who lacked a certain spice of simplicity, vowed to cross the room on tiptoe the next day; perfidious Amélie held him to his bargain.

For Lucien that morrow was the day when a young man resolves to cast off foolish sighing. Six months had brought him on a level with Louise; now he would be her lord and master. He left home determined to be extravagant in manner, to cry that he had lost his head and could not write a line. The horror some women feel for premeditation does honor to their delicacy; they prefer surrender on impulse to fulfillment of a plan. Prescribed happiness is not the kind any of us desire.

Mme. de Bargeton read fixed purpose in Lucien’s eyes and resolved to baffle him, partly by contradiction and partly by an exalted conception of love. She valued herself as a sovereign lady, a Beatrice, enthroned and looking down upon the tourney of literature; Lucien, as in duty bound, must win her by prowess—eclipse Lamartine, Sir Walter Scott, and Byron. She regarded her love as a stimulating power, meant to spur him to glory. This provincial Quixotry hallowed love, reverenced it, and resolved to be the reward of prolonged service; she desired a trial of constancy.

Lucien began with vehement petulance that a woman laughs at when heart-free and regrets when in love; Louise took a lofty tone and began one of her long orations.

“Was that your promise to me, Lucien?” she asked. “Do not sow regrets in the present time, so sweet as it is, to poison my after life. My whole heart is yours; what more must you have? Can it be your love is influenced by the clamor of the senses, when it is the beloved’s privilege to silence them? For whom do you take me? If I am not something more than a woman for you, I am less than a woman.”

“That is what you might say to a man if you cared nothing at all for him,” cried Lucien, frantic.

“If you cannot feel the sincere love underlying my ideas, you will never be worthy of me.”

“You are throwing doubts on my love to escape responding,” cried Lucien, and flung himself weeping at her feet.

The poor boy cried in earnest at the prospect of remaining so long at paradise’s gate. The tears of the poet, humbled through strength, were mingled with childish longing for a plaything.

“You have never loved me!” he cried.

“You do not believe what you say,” she answered, flattered by his violence.

“Then give me proof that you are mine,” said Lucien, dishevelled.

Just then Stanislas came up unheard. He saw Lucien in tears, half reclining with his head on Louise’s knee. The posture was suspicious; he turned sharply on Châtelet, who stood at the salon door. Mme. de Bargeton sprang up, but the spies beat a precipitate retreat like intruders, and she was not quick enough for them.

“Who came just now?” she asked the servants.

“M. de Chandour and M. du Châtelet,” said Gentil, her old footman.

Mme. de Bargeton went back, pale and trembling, to her boudoir.

“If they saw you just now, I am lost,” she told Lucien.

“So much the better!” exclaimed the poet; she smiled at his cry, so full of selfish love.

In the provinces such a story is magnified by the way it is told. Everyone knew in a moment that Lucien had been detected at Naïs’s feet. M. de Chandour, elated by his part, went first to tell the club, and thence from house to house, Châtelet hastening to say he had seen nothing; but by recusing himself he egged Stanislas on to talk and to add fresh details. Stanislas, thinking himself witty, enlarged the tale each time. Everyone flocked to Amélie’s that evening; exaggerated versions circulated among the Angoulême nobility, each narrator following Stanislas’ example. Women and men eagerly sought the truth; the loudest shriekers—Mesdames Amélie, Zéphirine, Fifine, and Lolotte—counterposed variations in every key.

“Well, well,” said one lady, “poor Naïs! I do not believe it; she has a blameless record behind her; she is too proud to be anything but a patroness. Still, if true, I pity her.”

“She is all the more to be pitied because she makes herself ridiculous; she is old enough to be M. Lulu’s mother, as Jacques called him. The little poet is twenty-two at most; Naïs is quite forty.”

“M. de Rubempré’s behavior proves Naïs innocent. A man does not kneel to ask for what he already has,” said M. du Châtelet.

“That is as may be!” said Francis, with levity that brought disapproval.

They pressed Stanislas for the facts; he offered a facetious tale with pantomime that made matters worse.

“It is incredible! At midday? Naïs was the last person I would have suspected! What will she do now?” Then followed more comments and endless suppositions. Châtelet defended Mme. de Bargeton, but ill; he stirred gossip instead of quelling it.

Lili, disconsolate at the fall of the fairest angel in Angoumois, went in tears to the palace. When Châtelet was convinced the town was agog, he went to Mme. de Bargeton’s where one whist game was on, and diplomatically asked for a talk in the boudoir. He seated her and began in an undertone—

“You know what Angoulême is talking about, of course?”

“No.”

“I am too much your friend to leave you in ignorance. I must put you in a position to silence slanders, invented, no doubt, by Amélie, who dares regard herself as your rival. This morning I came to call with that monkey Stanislas; he was a few paces ahead and came so far” (pointing to the boudoir door); “he says he saw you and M. de Rubempré in such a position that he could not enter; he turned on me bewildered and hurried me away before I had time to think; we were out in Beaulieu before he told me why he retreated. If I had known, I would not have left till I had cleared up the matter and exonerated you; but that would have proved nothing then.”

“Whether Stanislas’ eyes deceived him or he is right, he must have made a mistake. Dear Naïs, do not let that dolt trifle with your life, your honor, your future; stop his mouth at once. You know my position here. I need all these people, but I am entirely yours. Use me; I am ready to prove my love at any time and in any way. This morning I said I was at the salon door and saw nothing. If asked who told you this gossip, use me. I would be proud to be your champion; but M. de Bargeton is proper to demand from Stanislas an explanation.... Suppose young Rubempré behaved foolishly, a woman’s character ought not to be at the mercy of the first hare-brained boy who flings himself at her feet. That is what I have been saying.”

Naïs bowed and looked thoughtful, weary of provincial life. Châtelet had scarcely begun before her mind turned to Paris. Meanwhile the adorer found the silence awkward.

“Dispose of me, I repeat.”

“Thank you,” she answered.

“What will you do?”

“I shall see.”

A pause. “Are you so fond of that young Rubempré?” A proud smile stole over her; she folded her arms and fixed her gaze on the curtains. Châtelet went out; he could not read that high heart.

Later that evening, when Lucien and the four old gentlemen who came for whist had taken their leave without troubling themselves about tittle-tattle, M. de Bargeton—preparing for bed—was about to bid his wife good night when she stopped him.

“Come here, dear, I have something to say to you,” she said solemnly.

He followed her into the boudoir.

“Perhaps I have done wrong,” she began, “to show a warm interest in M. de Rubempré, which he, as well as stupid people here, has misinterpreted. This morning Lucien threw himself at my feet with a declaration, and Stanislas happened to come in just as I told the boy to get up. A woman, under any circumstances, has claims which courtesy prescribes to a gentleman; yet Stanislas has been saying he came unexpectedly and found us in an equivocal position. I was treating the boy as he deserved. If the young scatterbrain knew the scandal caused by his folly, he would go to insult Stanislas and compel him to fight. That would be a public proclamation of his love. I need not tell you that your wife is pure; but if you think, you will see it is dishonoring for both you and me if M. de Rubempré defends her. Go at once to Stanislas and ask him to give you satisfaction for his insulting language; you must not accept anything short of a full public retraction before witnesses of credit. In this way you will win back right-minded respect; you will behave like a man of spirit and a gentleman, and you will have a right to my esteem. I shall send Gentil on horseback to Escarbas; my father must be your second; old as he is, I know he will trample this puppet under foot who has smirched the reputation of a Nègrepelisse. You have the choice of weapons; choose pistols; you are an admirable shot.”

“I am going,” said M. de Bargeton, and he took his hat and cane.

“Good, that is how I like a man to behave, dear; you are a gentleman,” she said, and, touched, she let him kiss her brow. When the carriage gateway clanged behind him, tears came to her eyes despite herself.

“How he loves me!” she thought. “He clings to life, poor dear man, and yet he would give his life for me.”

It did not trouble M. de Bargeton that he must face a man and the muzzle of a pistol; he merely quaked inwardly about what to say. People of his stamp, who live in silence because their capacity is limited, often behave at crises with ready-made solemnity. If they speak little, they say little foolish; but a lack of confidence leads them to think much on what they must say; and, like Balaam’s ass, they sometimes speak marvelously to the point if a miracle loosens their tongues. M. de Bargeton bore himself like a man of uncommon sense and spirit, justifying those who thought him a philosopher of the Pythagorean school.

He reached Stanislas’ house at nine, bowed silently to Amélie before a room full of people, and greeted others with a simple smile which, under the circumstances, seemed profoundly ironic. A great silence followed, like the pause before a storm. Châtelet had returned and looked significantly from M. de Bargeton to Stanislas, whom the injured gentleman accosted politely.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Châtelet knew that a call at that hour meant the old M. de Bargeton would be in bed; it was evidently Naïs who had set the feeble arm in motion. Châtelet, intimate in the house, took M. de Bargeton aside.

“Do you wish to speak to Stanislas?”

“Yes,” said the old gentleman, pleased to find a go‑between.

“Very well; go into Amélie’s bedroom,” said the controller of excise, secretly glad at the prospect of a duel that might make Mme. de Bargeton a widow and put a barrier between her and Lucien. Châtelet then went to M. de Chandour.

“Stanislas,” he said, “here comes Bargeton to call you to account, no doubt, for the things you have been saying about Naïs. Go into your wife’s room, and behave, both of you, like gentlemen. Keep it quiet and make a great show of politeness—behave with phlegmatic British dignity.”

In a minute Stanislas and Châtelet went to Bargeton.

“Sir,” said the injured husband, “do you say you discovered Mme. de Bargeton and M. de Rubempré in an equivocal position?”

“M. Chardon,” corrected Stanislas, with ironic stress; he did not take Bargeton seriously.

“So be it,” answered the other. “If you do not withdraw your assertions at once before the company now in your house, I must ask you to look for a second. My father‑in‑law, M. de Nègrepelisse, will wait upon you at four o’clock tomorrow morning. Both of us may as well make our final arrangements, for the only way out is the one I have indicated. I choose pistols, as the insulted party.”

The speech, long rehearsed, came out without excitement. Stanislas turned pale. “After all, what did I see?” he wondered.

Put between the shame of recanting and the mute terror this man inspired, Stanislas chose the more remote peril.

“All right. Tomorrow morning,” he said, thinking the matter might be arranged somehow.

They rejoined the room. Everybody scanned their faces; Châtelet smiled, M. de Bargeton looked in his element, but Stanislas looked ghastly. Some women guessed the conference’s nature, and the whisper, “They are going to fight!” circulated. Half the room thought Stanislas in the wrong—his white face and demeanor convicted him of lying; the other half admired Bargeton. Châtelet was solemn and mysterious. Bargeton stayed a few minutes, scrutinized faces, and retired.

“Have you pistols?” Châtelet asked Stanislas in a whisper; Stanislas shook from head to foot.

Amélie knew what it meant. She felt ill, and the women took her into her bedroom. There was a sensation; everybody talked at once. The men stopped in the drawing‑room, declaring, with one voice, that M. de Bargeton was within his right.

“Would you have thought the old fogy capable of acting like this?” asked M. de Saintot.

“But he was a crack shot when young,” said the pitiless Jacques. “My father often told me of Bargeton’s exploits.”

“Pooh! Put them at twenty paces, and they will miss each other if you give them cavalry pistols,” said Francis, addressing Châtelet.

Châtelet stayed after the rest had gone to reassure Stanislas and his wife, and to explain that all would go off well. In a duel between a man of sixty and a man of thirty‑five, all advantage lay with the latter.

Early next morning, as Lucien sat at breakfast with David, who had come back alone from Marsac, in came Mme. Chardon with a scared face.

“Well, Lucien,” she said, “have you heard the news? Everyone is talking of it, even the market. M. de Bargeton all but killed M. de Chandour this morning in M. Tulloy’s meadow; people are making puns on the name. It seems M. de Chandour said he found you with Mme. de Bargeton yesterday.”

“It is a lie! Mme. de Bargeton is innocent,” cried Lucien.

“I heard about the duel from a countryman who saw it from his cart. M. de Nègrepelisse came at three in the morning to be Bargeton’s second; he told Chandour that if anything happened to his son‑in‑law he would avenge him. A cavalry officer lent the pistols. Nègrepelisse tried them repeatedly. Du Châtelet tried to prevent practice, but they referred to the officer; he said that, unless they meant to behave like children, they ought to have working pistols. The seconds put them at twenty‑five paces. Bargeton looked as if out for a walk. He fired first; the ball lodged in Chandour’s neck, and he dropped before he could return the shot. The house‑surgeon says Chandour will have a wry neck for the rest of his days. I came to tell you how it ended, lest you go to Mme. de Bargeton’s or show yourself in Angoulême, for some of Chandour’s friends might call you out.”

As she spoke, the apprentice brought in Gentil, Bargeton’s footman. He had a note for Lucien from Louise.

“You have doubtless heard the news,” she wrote, “of the duel between Chandour and my husband. We shall not be at home today. Be careful; do not show yourself. I ask this in the name of the affection you bear me. Would it not be best to spend this melancholy day listening to your Beatrice, whose whole life has been changed by this event, who has a thousand things to say to you?”

“Luckily, my marriage is fixed for the day after tomorrow,” said David, “and you will have an excuse for not going to Mme. de Bargeton’s so often.”

“Dear David,” returned Lucien, “she asks me to go today; I ought to do as she wishes; she knows better than we do how I should act now.”

“Then is everything ready here?” asked Mme. Chardon.

“Come and see,” cried David, delighted to exhibit the transformation of the first floor. Everything was new and fresh, pervaded by the sweet influences of early married days, still crowned by the wreath of orange blossoms and the bridal veil; days when love’s springtide finds expression in material things, and everything is white and spotless.

“Eve’s home will be fit for a princess,” said the mother, “but you have spent too much, you have been reckless.”

David smiled, but Mme. Chardon had touched a sore spot. The cost far exceeded his estimates; he could not afford to build above the shed. His mother‑in‑law must wait awhile for the home he meant. Nothing is more painful to a generous nature than failing to keep such promises; it mortified the little vanities of affection. David hid his embarrassment to spare Lucien; he feared Lucien might be overwhelmed by the sacrifices made for his sake.

“Eve and her girl friends have been working hard,” said Mme. Chardon. “The wedding clothes and house linen are ready. The girls, without letting her know, covered the mattresses with white twill and rose‑colored piping. So pretty! It makes one wish one were going to be married.”

Mother and daughter had spent all their savings to furnish David’s home with things a young bachelor never thinks of. They knew he was furnishing splendidly; something had been said about ordering a Limoges dinner‑service, and the two women strove to make Eve’s contributions worthy of David. This emulation in love and generosity would bring husband and wife into difficulties at the outset of married life, yet everything looked homely and comfortable, positive luxury in a town so behind the times as Angoulême then was.

As soon as Lucien saw his mother and David enter the bedroom with blue‑and‑white draperies and neat furniture, he slipped away to Mme. de Bargeton. He found Naïs at table with her husband; Bargeton’s early morning walk had sharpened his appetite, and he breakfasted quite unconcernedly after all that had passed. Lucien saw the dignified face of M. de Nègrepelisse, the old provincial noble, a relic of the old French noblesse, sitting beside Naïs.

When Gentil announced M. de Rubempré, the white‑headed old man gave him a keen, curious glance; the father was anxious to form his opinion of the man his daughter singled out. Lucien’s beauty impressed him; he could not repress an approving glance, but seemed to regard the affair as a flirtation, a mere passing fancy. Breakfast over, Louise left her father and Bargeton together; she beckoned Lucien to follow.

“Dear,” she said, half glad, half melancholy, “I am going to Paris, and my father is taking Bargeton back with him to the Escarbas, where he will stay during my absence. Mme. d’Espard (a Blamont‑Chauvry) has great influence and influential relations. The d’Espards are connections of ours; if she acknowledges the relationship, I shall cultivate her; she may procure a place for Bargeton. At my solicitation, it might be desired at Court that he represent the Charente, a step toward his election here. If he were a deputy, it would further other steps I wish to take in Paris. You, my darling, have brought about this change in my life. After this morning’s duel, I must shut up my house for some time; people will side with the Chandours against us. In our position, in a small town, absence is the only way to soften bad feeling. But I shall either succeed and never see Angoulême again, or I shall not succeed and then wait in Paris until I can spend summers at the Escarbas and winters in Paris. It is the only life for a woman of quality; I have waited too long. One day will suffice for our preparations; tomorrow night I set out. You are coming with me, are you not? You shall start first. I will overtake you between Mansle and Ruffec, and we shall soon be in Paris. There is the life for a man with anything in him. We are only at our ease among equals; we are uncomfortable in other society. Paris, besides, is the capital of the intellectual world, the stage on which you will succeed; overleap the gulf that separates us quickly. You must not let your ideas grow rancid in the provinces; put yourself into communication at once with the great men of the nineteenth century. Try to stand well with the Court and those in power. No honor, no distinction, comes to talent that perishes for lack of light in a little town; tell me any great work executed in the provinces! See how Jean‑Jacques, sublime in his poverty, felt the irresistible attraction of that sun of the intellectual world which produces ever‑new glories and stimulates intellect—Paris, where men rub against one another. What is it but your duty to take your place in the succession of pléiades that rise generation after generation? You have no idea how much being brought into a high social light helps a clever young man. I will introduce you to Mme. d’Espard; it’s not easy to get into her set; but you meet all the greatest people at her house—cabinet ministers and ambassadors, great orators, peers and men of influence, wealthy or famous people. A young man with looks and more than sufficient genius could fail to excite interest only by very bad management.

“There is no pettiness about those who are truly great; they will support you; and when you have a high position, your work will rise in public opinion. The great problem for the artist is putting himself in evidence. There will be hundreds of chances of making your way, sinecures, a pension from the civil list. The Bourbons are fond of encouraging letters and the arts; you must be a religious poet and a Royalist poet at the same time. Not only is it the right course, but it is the way to get on. Do the Liberals give places and rewards and make the fortunes of men of letters? Take the right road and reach the goal of genius. You have my secret; do not breathe it, and prepare to follow me. Would you rather not go?” she added, surprised that he made no answer.

To Lucien, listening to these alluring words and bewildered by the rapid bird’s‑eye view of Paris, it seemed as if he had been using only half his brain and suddenly found the other half; his ideas widened. He saw himself stagnating in Angoulême like a frog under a stone. Paris and her splendors rose before him: the Eldorado of provincial imaginings, with golden robes and the royal diadem, arms outstretched to talent. Great men would greet him there. Everything smiled upon genius. There were no jealous booby‑squires to invent gibes and humiliate a man of letters; no stupid indifference to poetry. Paris was the fountain‑head of poetry; there the poet was brought into the light and paid. Publishers should no sooner read the opening pages of An Archer of Charles IX than open their cash‑boxes with “How much do you want?” And besides all this, he understood that this journey with Mme. de Bargeton would virtually give her to him; that they should live together.

At “Would you rather not go?” tears came to his eyes; he flung his arms about Louise, held her tightly, and kissed her passionately. Suddenly he checked himself, as if memory had struck.

“Great heavens!” he cried, “my sister is to be married the day after tomorrow!”

That exclamation was the last expiring cry of noble and single‑hearted boyhood. The strong ties that bind young hearts to home and early friendship were to be severed.

“Well,” cried the haughty Nègrepelisse, “and what has your sister’s marriage to do with the progress of our love? Have you set your mind so much on being best man at a wedding of tradespeople and workingmen that you cannot give up these exalted joys for my sake? A great sacrifice, indeed!” she went on, scornfully. “This morning I sent my husband out to fight in your quarrel. There, sir, go; I am mistaken in you.”

She sank fainting upon the sofa. Lucien went to her, entreating pardon, cursing his family, his sister, and David.

“I had such faith in you!” she said. “M. de Cante‑Croix had an adored mother; but to win a letter from me, and the words, ‘I am satisfied,’ he fell in the thick of the fight. And now, when I ask you to take a journey with me, you cannot think of giving up a wedding dinner for my sake.”

Lucien was ready to kill himself; his desperation was so unfeigned that Louise forgave him, though she made him feel he must redeem his mistake.

“Come, come,” she said, “be discreet, and to‑morrow at midnight be upon the road, a hundred paces out of Mansle.”

Lucien felt the globe shrink under his feet; he went back to David’s house, hopes pursuing him like Furies, for he had glimmerings of endless difficulties, summed up in the appalling words, “Where is the money to come from?”

He stood in such terror of David’s perspicacity that he locked himself into his pretty new study until he could recover; his head swam in this new position. So he must leave the rooms just furnished at such cost, and all the sacrifices had been made in vain. Then it occurred to him his mother might take the rooms and save David the heavy expense of building at the yard’s end; his departure would be a convenience. He found many urgent reasons for sudden flight; there is no such Jesuit as the desire of your heart. He hurried to tell his sister in L’Houmeau and take counsel. As he reached Postel’s shop, he bethought himself that if all else failed he could borrow enough to live on for a year from his father’s successor.

“Three francs per day will be abundance if I live with Louise,” he thought; “it is only a thousand francs for a year. And in six months’ time I shall have plenty of money.”

Under seal and promise of secrecy, Eve and her mother heard Lucien’s confidences. Both women began to cry as they heard his ambitious plans; when he asked why they were troubled, they said every penny had been spent on table‑linen, house‑linen, Eve’s wedding clothes, and many things David overlooked. They had been glad to do it, for David had made a marriage‑settlement of ten thousand francs on Eve. Lucien then spoke of a loan; Mme. Chardon undertook to ask M. Postel to lend a thousand francs for a year.

“But, Lucien,” said Eve, a thought clutching her heart, “you will not be here at my wedding! Oh! come back; I will put it off a few days. Surely she will give you leave to come back in a fortnight if you go now? Surely she would spare you a week when we brought you up for her? We shall have no luck if you are not at the wedding.... But will a thousand francs be enough?” she asked, interrupting. “Your coat suits you divinely, but you have only that one! Only two fine shirts; the other six are coarse; three of your white ties are common muslin, only two lawn cravats, your handkerchiefs not good. Where will you find a sister in Paris to get up your linen in one day? You will want much more. You have just one pair of new nankeen trousers; last year’s are tight; you will be obliged to have clothes made in Paris, and Paris prices are not Angoulême’s. You have only two presentable white waistcoats; I have mended the others already. Come, I advise you to take two thousand francs.”

David came in as she spoke and apparently heard the last two words; he looked at the brother and sister and said nothing.

“Do not keep anything from me,” he said at last.

“Well,” exclaimed Eve, “he is going away with her.”

Mme. Chardon came in again, and, not seeing David, began at once:

“Postel is willing to lend you the thousand francs, Lucien,” she said, “but only for six months; and he wants a bill endorsed by your brother‑in‑law, for he says you give him no security.”

She turned and saw David; there was a deep silence. The Chardons felt ashamed for having abused David’s goodness. Tears stood in the young printer’s eyes.

“Then you will not be here at our wedding,” he began. “You are not going to live with us! And here have I been squandering all that I had! Oh, Lucien, as I came along, bringing Eve her little bits of wedding jewelry, I did not think I should be sorry I spent the money on them.” He brushed his hand over his eyes as he drew the tiny morocco‑covered boxes from his pocket and set them on the table.

“Oh! why do you think so much for me?” protested Eve, giving him a divinely sweet smile that belied her words.

“Mamma, dear,” said David, “just tell M. Postel I will put my name to the bill, for I can tell from your face, Lucien, that you have quite made up your mind.”

Lucien’s head sank dejectedly; there was a pause, then he said, “Do not think hardly of me, my dear, good angels.”

He put his arms about Eve and David, drew them close, and held them tightly as he added, “Wait and see what comes of it, and you shall know how much I love you. What is the good of our high thinking, David, if it does not enable us to disregard petty ceremonial in which the law entangles our affections? Shall I not be with you in spirit despite distance? Shall we not be united in thought? Have I not a destiny to fulfil? Will publishers come here to seek my Archer of Charles IX and the Marguerites? A little sooner or later I shall be obliged to do as I am doing to‑day, should I not? And shall I ever find a better opportunity? Does not my success depend upon my entrance into life in Paris through the Marquise d’Espard’s salon?”

“He is right,” said Eve; “you yourself said he ought to go to Paris at once.”

David took Eve’s hand and led her into the narrow little room where she had slept for seven years.

“Love, you were saying just now that he would want two thousand francs?” he murmured in her ear. “Postel is only lending one thousand.”

Eve looked anguish at him; he read her meaning.

“Listen, my adored Eve, we are making a bad start. Yes, my expenses have taken all my capital; I have just two thousand francs left, and half will be needed to carry on the business. If we give your brother the thousand francs, it will mean giving away our bread; we shall live in anxiety. If I were alone, I know what I should do; but we are two. Decide for us.”

Eve, distraught, sprang to his arms and kissed him tenderly through tears: “Do as you would if you were alone; I will work to earn the money.”

Despite the most impassioned kiss ever given and taken by betrothed lovers, David left Eve overcome, and went out to Lucien.

“Do not worry,” he said; “you shall have your two thousand francs.”

“Go see Postel,” said Mme. Chardon, “for you must both sign the bill.”

When Lucien and David returned unexpectedly, they found Eve and her mother on their knees in prayer. The women felt sure Lucien’s return would bring realization of many hopes; at the moment they only felt how much they lost in his parting, and the coming days would be filled with fears for Lucien.

“If you could ever forget this sight,” David said in Lucien’s ear, “you would be the basest of men.”

David, no doubt, thought these brave words needed; Mme. de Bargeton’s influence seemed less to be feared than Lucien’s unlucky instability—he was so easily led. Eve soon packed Lucien’s clothes; the Fernando Cortez of literature carried but little baggage. He wore his best overcoat, his best waistcoat, and one of the two fine shirts. The whole of his linen, the celebrated coat, and his manuscript made a small package. To hide it from Mme. de Bargeton, David proposed to send it by coach to a paper merchant he dealt with and wrote asking him to keep the parcel until Lucien sent for it.

Despite Mme. de Bargeton’s precautions, Châtelet found she was leaving Angoulême; to discover whether she traveled alone or with Lucien, he sent his man to Ruffec to watch every carriage changing horses there.

“If she is taking her poet with her,” he thought, “I have her now.”

Lucien set out before daybreak the next morning. David went with him. David had hired a cabriolet, pretending he was going to Marsac on business, a deception that seemed probable. The two friends went to Marsac and spent part of the day with the old “bear.” As evening came they set out again, and at dawn waited on the road beyond Mansle for Mme. de Bargeton. When the seventy‑year‑old traveling carriage he had often seen in the coach‑house appeared, Lucien felt more deeply moved than ever; he sprang into David’s arms.

“God grant that this may be for your good!” said David; he climbed into the shabby cabriolet and drove away with dread clutching his heart; he had terrible presentiments of Lucien’s fate in Paris.

ADDENDUM

Note: Two Poets is part one of a trilogy. The second part is A Distinguished Provincial at Paris and details Lucien’s further adventures. Part three is titled Eve and David and continues their story. In other addendum references parts one and three are combined under the title Lost Illusions.

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy:

Bargeton, Madame de (see Châtelet, Baronne du); Cérizet; Chardon, Madame (née Rubempré); Châtelet, Sixte, Baron du; Châtelet, Marie‑Louise‑Anaïs de Nègrepelisse, Baronne du; Cointet, Boniface; Cointet, Jean; Courtois; Courtois, Madame; Desplein; Gentil; Grozier, Abbé; Hautoy, Francis du; Maucombe, Comte de; Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de; Nègrepelisse, De; Petit‑Claud; Pimentel, Marquis and Marquise de; Postel; Prieur, Madame; Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de; Rastignac, Laure‑Rose and Agathe de; Rubempré, Lucien‑Chardon de; Séchard, Jérôme‑Nicolas; Séchard, David; Séchard, Madame David; Senonches, Jacques de; Senonches, Madame Jacques de; Stanhope, Lady Esther.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
MIDDLE OF THE STORY repeated three times, separated by decorative hash-line separators (###, #############, ################################################) across the original layout.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################