I have longed to tell a simple true story that should strike terror into two young lovers and drive them to take refuge in each other's hearts, as children cling at the sight of a snake. At the risk of being taken for a coxcomb, I state my intention at the outset.

I myself played a part in this almost commonplace tragedy; so if it fails to interest you, the fault will be partly mine, partly due to historical veracity. Many things in real life are uninteresting; it is half of art to select from realities those with poetic possibilities.

In 1819 I was traveling from Paris to Moulins. My finances obliged me to take an outside place. Englishmen regard those airy perches as the best seats, and for the first few miles I found many reasons to agree. A young fellow, apparently better off, chose the seat beside me and listened with inoffensive smiles. Near age, similar ways of thinking, a shared love of fresh air and the rich landscape through which the coach lumbered, and an indefinable magnetism drew us before long into one of those short-lived traveller's intimacies in which we unbend the more because the intercourse is transient and makes no demands upon the future.

We had not come thirty leagues before we were talking of women and love. Then, with the circumspection such matters require, we naturally proceeded to our lady-loves. Young as we both were, we still admired "the woman of a certain age," that is, the woman between thirty-five and forty. Oh! any poet who should have listened to our talk, for how many stages beyond Montargis, would have reaped a harvest of flaming epithet, rapturous description, and tender confidences. Our bashful fears, our silent interjections, our blushes, as we met each other's eyes, were eloquent with a boyish charm I have ceased to feel. One must remain young, no doubt, to understand youth.

Well, we understood one another admirably on all the essential points of passion. We had laid it down as an axiom from the outset that there was no such driveling nonsense as a certificate of birth; that many women were younger at forty than girls of twenty; and, to come to the point, that a woman is no older than she looks.

This theory set no limits to the age of love, so we struck into a boundless sea. At length, when we had portrayed our mistresses as young, charming, and devoted—women of rank, taste, intellect and cleverness; endowed them with tiny feet and delicate, fragrant skin—then came the admission: on his part that Madame Such-an-one was thirty-eight, and on mine that I worshiped a woman of forty. Thereupon, as if released from some vague fear, our confidences came thick and fast when we found that we were in the same confraternity of love. It was which of us should overtop the other in sentiment.

One of us had traveled six hundred miles to see his mistress for an hour. The other, at the risk of being shot for a wolf, had prowled about her park one night. Out came all our follies in fact. If it is pleasant to remember past dangers, is it not at least as pleasant to recall past delights? We live through the joy a second time. We told each other everything—our perils, our great joys, our little pleasures, and even the humors of the situation. My friend's countess had lighted a cigar for him; mine made chocolate for me and wrote to me every day when we did not meet; his lady had come to spend three days with him at the risk of ruin to her reputation; mine had done even better, or worse, if you will. Our countesses, moreover, were adored by their husbands; these gentlemen were enslaved by the charm possessed by every woman who loves; and, with almost supererogatory simplicity, afforded us that sufficient spice of danger which increases pleasure. Ah! how quickly the wind swept away our talk and our happy laughter!

When we reached Pouilly, I scanned my new friend with much interest; it was not difficult to imagine him the hero of a very serious love affair. Picture a young man of middle height, well proportioned, a bright expressive face, dark hair, blue eyes, moist lips, and even white teeth. A certain not unbecoming pallor spread his delicately cut features, and faint dark circles about his eyes as if recovering from illness. Add that he had white, shapely hands, which he tended as a pretty woman should; that he seemed very well informed and decidedly clever, and you will see he was more than worthy of a countess. Indeed, many a girl might have wished for such a husband; he was a Vicomte with an income of twelve or fifteen thousand livres, "to say nothing of expectations."

About a league out of Pouilly the coach was overturned. My luckless comrade, thinking to save himself, jumped to the edge of a newly-ploughed field instead of following the vehicle and clinging tightly to the roof, as I did. He either miscalculated or slipped; how it happened I do not know, but the coach fell upon him, and he was crushed under it.

We carried him into a peasant's cottage, and there amid moans wrung from him by horrible sufferings he contrived to give me a commission—a sacred task, since it was laid on me by a dying man's last wish. Poor boy, all through his agony he tortured himself with the thought of the shock his mistress would feel when she read of his death in a newspaper. He begged me to go and break the news to her. He bade me look for a key he wore on a ribbon about his neck. I found it half buried in the flesh, but the dying boy did not utter a sound as I extricated it as gently as possible from the wound it had made. He had scarcely given me the necessary directions—I was to go to his home at La Charite-sur-Loire for his mistress' love-letters, which he conjured me to return to her—when he grew speechless in the middle of a sentence; but from his last gesture I understood the fatal key would be my passport in his mother's house. It troubled him that he was powerless to utter a single word to thank me, for he had no doubt of my wish to serve him. He looked wistfully at me, then his eyelids drooped in token of farewell, his head sank, and he died. His death was the only fatal accident caused by the overturn.

"But it was partly his own fault," the coachman said to me.

At La Charite I executed the poor fellow's dying wishes. His mother was away, which in a manner was fortunate for me. Nevertheless, I had to assuage the grief of an old woman-servant, who staggered back at the tidings of her young master's death and sank half-dead into a chair when she saw the blood-stained key. But I had another and more dreadful sorrow to think of—the sorrow of a woman who had lost her last love; so I left the old woman to her prosopopeia and carried off the precious correspondence, carefully sealed by my friend of the day.

The Countess' chateau lay some eight leagues beyond Moulins, and then there was distance to walk across country. So it was not exactly easy to deliver my message. For divers reasons into which I need not enter, I had barely money to take me to Moulins. However, youthful enthusiasm determined me to hasten thither on foot as fast as possible. Bad news travels swiftly, and I wished to be first at the chateau. I asked for the shortest way and hurried through the field paths of the Bourbonnais, bearing, as it were, a dead man on my back. The nearer I came to the Chateau de Montpersan, the more aghast I felt at my strange self-imposed pilgrimage. Vast numbers of romantic fancies ran through my head. I imagined all kinds of situations in which I might find this Comtesse de Montpersan, or, to observe the laws of romance, this Juliette, so passionately beloved of my traveling companion. I sketched ingenious answers to the questions she might put. At every turn of a wood, in every beaten pathway, I rehearsed a modern version of the scene in which Sosie describes the battle to his lantern. To my shame be it said, I had thought at first of nothing but the part I was to play, of my own cleverness, of how I should demean myself; but now that I was in the country, an ominous thought flashed through my soul like a thunderbolt tearing through gray cloud.

What an awful piece of news for a woman whose whole thoughts were full of her young lover, who was looking forward hour by hour to a joy which no words can express, a woman who had been at a world of pains to invent plausible pretexts to draw him to her side. Yet, after all, it was a cruel deed of charity to be the messenger of death! So I hurried on, splashing and bemiring myself in the byways of the Bourbonnais.

Before very long I reached a great chestnut avenue with a pile of buildings at the further end—the Chateau of Montpersan stood out against the sky like a mass of brown cloud, with sharp fantastic outlines. All the doors of the chateau stood open. This in itself disconcerted me, and routed all my plans; but I went in boldly, and in a moment found myself between a couple of dogs, barking as your true country-bred animals can bark. The sound brought out a hurrying servant-maid, who, when informed that I wished to speak to Mme. la Comtesse, waved a hand towards the masses of trees in the English park which wound about the chateau with "Madame is out there—"

"Many thanks," said I ironically. I might have wandered for a couple of hours in the park with her "out there" to guide me.

In the meantime, a pretty little girl, with curling hair, dressed in a white frock, a rose-colored sash, and a broad frill at the throat, had overheard or guessed the question and its answer. She gave me a glance and vanished, calling in shrill childish tones:

"Mother, here is a gentleman who wishes to speak to you!"

And, along the winding alleys, I followed the skipping, dancing white frill, a sort of will-o'-the-wisp that showed me the way among the trees.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
I must confess. I stopped behind the last shrub in the avenue, pulled up my collar, rubbed my shabby hat and my trousers with my cuffs, dusted my coat with my sleeves, and gave them a final cleansing rub one against the other. I buttoned my coat carefully so as to exhibit the inner, always the least worn, side of the cloth, and at last turned down the tops of my trousers over my boots, cleaned in the grass. Thanks to this Gascon toilet, I could hope that the lady would not take me for the local rate collector; but now when my thoughts travel back to that episode of my youth, I sometimes laugh at my own expense.

Suddenly, just as I was composing myself, at a turning in the green walk, among a wilderness of flowers lighted up by a ray of sunlight, I saw Juliette—Juliette and her husband. The pretty little girl held her mother by the hand, and it was easy to see that the lady had quickened her pace at the child's ambiguous phrase. Taken aback by the sight of a stranger, who bowed with an awkward air, she looked at me with a coolly courteous expression and a pout in which I, who knew her secret, could read the full extent of her disappointment. I sought in vain to remember any of the elegant phrases so laboriously prepared.

This momentary hesitation gave the lady's husband time to come forward. A myriad of thoughts flitted through my brain. To give myself a countenance, I made a few feeble inquiries, asking whether the persons present were really M. le Comte and Mme. la Comtesse de Montpersan. These imbecilities gave me time to form my own conclusions at a glance, and, with a perspicacity rare at that age, to analyze the husband and wife whose solitude was about to be so rudely disturbed.

The husband seemed a typical provincial nobleman. I noticed his big shoes first, which made a deeper impression than a seedy black coat, threadbare trousers, a flabby cravat, or a crumpled shirt collar. There was a touch of magistrate in him, more of a Prefecture councillor, the self-importance of a local mayor, and the soured temper of an unsuccessful candidate never returned since 1816. His face was wizened, wrinkled and sunburned, his scanty hair long and sleekly gray. His character was an odd mixture of homely sense and sheer silliness, a rich man's overbearing ways and a lack of manners; the sort led by his wife yet fancying himself master, apt to domineer in trifles and let more important things slip—there you have the man.

But the Countess—what a sharp contrast! She was small, flat and graceful; so fragile you would fear to break a bone to touch her. She wore a white muslin dress, a rose-colored sash, and rose ribbons in the pretty cap on her head; her chemisette moulded to her shoulders and rounded contours, awakening an irresistible desire of possession in the heart. Her eyes were dark and expressive, her movements graceful, her foot charming. An experienced man of pleasure would not have given her more than thirty years; her forehead was so girlish. In character she recalled the Comtesse de Lignolles and the Marquise de B----, types fresh in the memory of any young man who has read Louvet's romance.

In a moment I saw how things stood and took a diplomatic course creditable to an old ambassador. For once, perhaps for the only time in my life, I used tact, and knew the special skill of courtiers and men of the world.

I have had so many battles to fight since those heedless days that they left me no time to distil daily actions and make everything conform to the rules of etiquette and good taste which wither the most generous emotions.

"M. le Comte," I said with an air of mystery, "I should like a few words with you," and I fell back a pace or two.

He followed my example. Juliette left us together, going away unconcernedly, like a wife who knew she could learn her husband's secrets whenever she chose.

I told the Count briefly of the death of my traveling companion. The effect produced by my news convinced me that his affection for his young collaborator was cordial enough, and this emboldened me to speak as I did.

"My wife will be in despair," cried he; "I shall be obliged to break the news of this unhappy event with great caution."

"Monsieur," I said, "I addressed you first, as duty required. I could not, without informing you, deliver a message to Mme. la Comtesse entrusted to me by a stranger; this commission is a sacred trust, a secret I cannot dispose of. From the high idea he gave me of your character, I felt sure you would not oppose the fulfilment of a dying request. Mme. la Comtesse will be free to break the silence imposed on me."

At this eulogy the Count swung his head amiably, responded with a somewhat involved compliment, and finally left me a free field. We returned to the house. The bell rang, and I was invited to dinner. As we came up to the house, a grave and silent couple, Juliette stole a glance at us. Surprised to find her husband contriving a frivolous excuse to leave us together, she stopped and gave me that look only women can give. In that glance there was the pardonable curiosity of the mistress confronted with a guest dropped from the skies and innumerable doubts, warranted by the state of my clothes, my youth and my expression—all singularly at variance; there was the disdain of the adored mistress, in whose eyes all men save one are as nothing; there were involuntary tremors and alarms; and, above all, the thought that it was tiresome to have an unexpected guest just now, when, no doubt, she had been scheming to enjoy solitude for her love. I understood this mute eloquence, and all the pity and compassion in me answered with a sad smile. I thought of her, as I had seen her in the pride of her beauty, standing in the sunny alley with flowers on either hand; and as that fair picture rose before my eyes, I could not repress a sigh.

"Alas, madame, I have just made a very arduous journey——undertaken solely on your account."

"Sir!"

"Oh! it is on behalf of one who calls you Juliette that I am come," I continued. Her face grew white.

"You will not see him to-day."

"Is he ill?" she asked, and her voice sank lower.

"Yes. But for pity's sake, control yourself.... He intrusted me with secrets that concern you, and you may be sure that never messenger could be more discreet nor more devoted than I."

"What is the matter with him?"

"How if he loved you no longer?"

"Oh! that is impossible!" she cried, and a faint, frank smile broke over her face. Then a shudder ran through her; she reddened, and gave me a wild, swift glance as she asked:

"Is he alive?"

Great God! What a terrible phrase! I was too young to bear that tone; I made no reply, only looked at the unhappy woman in helpless bewilderment.

"Monsieur, monsieur, give me an answer!" she cried.

"Yes, madame."

"Is it true? Oh! tell me the truth; I can hear the truth. Tell me the truth! Any pain would be less keen than this suspense."

I answered by two tears wrung from me by that strange tone of hers. She leaned against a tree with a faint, sharp cry.

"Madame, here comes your husband!"

"Have I a husband?" and with those words she fled away out of sight.

"Well," cried the Count, "dinner is growing cold.—Come, monsieur."

Thereupon I followed the master of the house into the dining-room. Dinner was served with all the luxury we expect in Paris. There were five covers laid: three for the Count and Countess and their little daughter; mine, which should have been his; and another for the canon of Saint-Denis, who said grace, and then asked:

"Why, where can our dear Countess be?"

"Oh! she will be here directly," said the Count. He had hastily helped us to the soup, and was dispatching an ample plateful with portentous speed.

"Oh! nephew," exclaimed the canon, "if your wife were here, you would behave more rationally."

"Papa will make himself ill!" said the child with a mischievous look.

Shortly after, as the Count eagerly helped himself to a slice of venison, a housemaid came in with, "We cannot find madame anywhere, sir!"

I sprang up at the words with a dread written so plainly in my face that the old canon came out after me into the garden. The Count, for appearances' sake, came as far as the threshold.

"Don't go, don't go!" called he. "Don't trouble yourselves in the least," but he did not offer to accompany us.

We three—the canon, the housemaid, and I—hurried through the garden walks and over the bowling-green in the park, shouting, listening for an answer, growing more uneasy every moment. As we hurried along, I told the story of the fatal accident, and discovered how strongly the maid was attached to her mistress, for she took my dread far more seriously than the canon. We went by the pools of water and all over the park, but we neither found the Countess nor any sign that she had passed that way. At last we turned back, and under the walls of some outbuildings I heard a smothered, wailing cry, so stifled that it was scarcely audible. The sound seemed to come from a place that might have been a granary. I went in at all risks, and there we found Juliette. With the instinct of despair she had buried herself deep in the hay, hiding her face in it to deaden those dreadful cries—pudency even stronger than grief. She was sobbing and crying like a child, but there was a more poignant, piteous sound in the sobs. There was nothing left in the world for her. The maid pulled the hay from her; her mistress submitted with the supine listlessness of a dying animal. The maid could find nothing to say but "There! madame; there, there——"

"What is the matter with her? What is it, niece?" the old canon kept exclaiming.

At last, with the girl's help, I carried Juliette to her room, gave orders that she was not to be disturbed, and that every one must be told that the Countess suffered from a sick headache. Then we came down to the dining-room, the canon and I.

Some little time had passed since we left the table; I had scarcely given a thought to the Count since we left him under the peristyle; his indifference had surprised me, but my amazement increased when we came back and found him seated philosophically at table. He had eaten almost the whole dinner, to the huge delight of his little daughter; the child smiled at her father's flagrant breach of the Countess' rules. The man's odd indifference was explained by a mild altercation with the canon. The Count was suffering from some serious complaint; I cannot remember now what, but his medical advisers had put him on a severe regimen, and the ferocious hunger familiar to convalescents, sheer animal appetite, had overpowered all human sensibilities. In that little space I had seen human nature under two very different aspects, with a grotesque element in the midst of a terrible tragedy.

The evening that followed was dreary. I was tired. The canon racked his brains to discover a reason for his niece's tears. The lady's husband silently digested his dinner; content, apparently, with the Countess' vague explanation sent through the maid, putting forward some feminine ailment as her excuse. We all went early to bed.

As I passed the door of the Countess' room on the way to my night's lodging, I asked the servant timidly for news. She heard my voice and would have me come in, and tried to talk, but in vain—she could not utter a sound. She bent her head, and I withdrew. In spite of the painful agitation I had felt, I fell asleep, tired out with my forced march.

Late in the night I was awakened by the grating sound of curtain rings on rods. There sat the Countess at the foot of my bed. The light from a lamp on my table fell full upon her face.

"Is it really true, monsieur, quite true?" she asked. "I do not know how I can live after that awful blow which struck me down a little while since; but just now I feel calm. I want to know everything."

"What calm!" I said to myself as I saw the ghastly pallor of her face against her brown hair, and heard the guttural tones of her voice. Those few hours had bleached her; she had lost a woman's last glow of color. Her eyes were red and swollen; nothing of their beauty remained, nothing looked out of them save bitter, exceeding grief; it was as if a gray cloud covered the place through which the sun had shone.

I told her the accident in a few words, without dwelling on harrowing details. I told her about our first day's journey, filled with recollections of her and of love. She listened eagerly, without shedding a tear, leaning her face towards me like a zealous doctor watching a patient's change. When she seemed to have opened her whole heart to pain, deliberately plunging into misery with the frenzy of despair, I caught my opportunity and told her of the fears that troubled the poor dying man, how and why he had given me this fatal message. Then her tears were dried by the fires burning in the dark depths within her; she grew even paler. When I drew the letters from beneath my pillow and held them out to her, she took them mechanically; then, trembling from head to foot, she said in a hollow voice:

"And I burned all his letters!—I have nothing of him left!—Nothing! nothing!"

She struck her hand against her forehead.

"Madame—" I began.

She glanced at me in the convulsion of grief.

"I cut this from his head, this lock of his hair."

I gave her that last imperishable token that had been a very part of him she loved. If you had felt, as I did then, her burning tears falling on your hands, you would know what gratitude is when it follows so closely upon a benefit. Her eyes shone with a feverish glitter; a faint ray of happiness gleamed out of her terrible suffering as she grasped my hands and said, choking:

"Ah! you love! May you be happy always. May you never lose her whom you love."

She broke off, and fled away with her treasure.

Next morning that night-scene seemed like a dream; to make sure of the piteous truth I looked fruitlessly under my pillow for the packet of letters. There is no need to tell you how the next day went. I spent several hours with the Juliette my poor comrade had so praised. In her lightest words and gestures I saw proofs of the nobleness of soul and delicacy of feeling which made her what she was—one of those beloved, loving, self-sacrificing natures so rarely found upon this earth.

In the evening the Comte de Montpersan came as far as Moulins with me. There he spoke embarrassedly:

"Monsieur, if it is not abusing your good-nature, and acting very inconsiderately towards a stranger to whom we are already under obligations, would you, as you are going to Paris, have the goodness to remit a sum of money to M. de——, in the Rue du Sentier; I owe him an amount, and he asked me to send it as soon as possible."

"Willingly," said I. And in the innocence of my heart, I took charge of a rouleau of twenty-five louis d'or, which paid the expenses of my journey back to Paris; only when, on my arrival, I went to the address indicated to repay the amount to M. de Montpersan's correspondent did I understand the ingenious delicacy with which Juliette had obliged me. Was not all the genius of a loving woman revealed in such a way of lending, in her reticence about a poverty easily guessed?

And what rapture to have this adventure to tell to a woman who clung to you more closely in dread, saying, "Oh, my dear, not you! You must not die!"
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################