Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

AT THE SIGN OF THE CAT AND RACKET

By Honore De Balzac

Translated by Clara Bell

                              DEDICATION

                  To Mademoiselle Marie de Montheau

AT THE SIGN OF THE CAT AND RACKET

Half-way down the Rue Saint-Denis, near the corner of the Rue du Petit-Lion, stood one of those delightful houses that let historians reconstruct old Paris by analogy. The threatening walls of this tumbledown abode seemed decorated with hieroglyphics—the Xs and Vs the horizontal or diagonal timbers traced on the front, outlined by little parallel cracks in the plaster. Every beam appeared to quiver in its mortices at the passing of the lightest vehicle. This venerable structure was crowned by a triangular roof of which no example will, ere long, be seen in Paris. Warped by the extremes of the Paris climate, the covering projected three feet over the roadway, as much to protect the threshold from rainfall as to shelter the wall of a loft and its sill-less dormer-window. The upper story was built of planks overlapping each other like slates, doubtless not to overweight the frail house.

One rainy morning in March, a young man, carefully wrapped in his cloak, stood under the awning of a shop opposite this old house, studying it with the enthusiasm of an antiquary. In fact, this relic of sixteenth-century civic life offered more than one problem to an observer. Each story presented some singularity; on the first floor four tall, narrow windows, close together, were filled as to the lower panes with boards, producing the doubtful light by which a clever salesman can ascribe to his goods the color his customers desire. The young man seemed very scornful of this part of the house; his eyes had not yet rested on it. The windows of the second floor, where the Venetian blinds were drawn up, revealing dingy muslin curtains behind large Bohemian panes, did not interest him either. His attention was attracted to the third floor, to modest sash-frames of wood, so clumsily wrought they might belong in the Museum of Arts and Crafts to illustrate early French carpentry. These windows were glazed with small squares of glass so green that, but for his good eyes, the young man could not have seen the blue-checked cotton curtains that screened the room’s mysteries from profane eyes. Now and then, weary of his fruitless contemplation or of the silence that enwrapped the house like the whole neighborhood, he dropped his eyes toward the lower regions. An involuntary smile parted his lips each time he looked at the shop, where, in fact, were some laughable details.

A formidable wooden beam, resting on four pillars that seemed bent under the weight of the decrepit house, had been encrusted with as many coats of different paint as there are rouge layers on an old duchess’ cheek. In the middle of this broad and fantastically carved joist was an old painting representing a cat playing rackets. This picture moved the young man to mirth. No modern painter could invent so comical a caricature. The animal held in one forepaw a racket as big as itself, standing on its hind legs to aim at an enormous ball returned by a man in a fine embroidered coat. Drawing, color, and accessories suggested the artist had meant to make game of the shop-owner and passer-by. Time, while impairing this artless painting, had made it yet more grotesque by introducing uncertain features that must have puzzled a conscientious idler. For instance, the cat’s tail had been eaten into so that it might now be taken for the figure of a spectator—so long, thick, and furry were the tails of our forefathers’ cats. To the right of the picture, on an azure field that ill-disguised the decay of the wood, could be read the name “Guillaume,” and to the left, “Successor to Master Chevrel.” Sun and rain had worn away most of the gilding parsimoniously applied to the letters of this superscription, in which Us and Vs had changed places in obedience to old-world orthography.

To quench the pride of those who believe the world grows continually cleverer and that modern humbug surpasses everything, note that these signs, which seem whimsical to many Paris merchants, are the dead pictures of once living pictures by which our roguish ancestors tempted customers. Thus the Spinning Sow, the Green Monkey, and others were animals in cages whose skills astonished the passer-by, proving the patience of the fifteenth-century artisan. Such curiosities enriched their fortunate owners more than the signs of “Providence,” “Good-faith,” “Grace of God,” and “Decapitation of John the Baptist,” still seen in the Rue Saint-Denis.

However, our stranger was certainly not standing there to admire the cat, which a minute’s attention sufficed to stamp on his memory. The young man himself had his peculiarities. His cloak, folded like an antique drapery, showed a smart pair of shoes, all the more remarkable in the Paris mud because he wore white silk stockings, on which splashes betrayed his impatience. He had just come, no doubt, from a wedding or a ball; for at this early hour he held a pair of white gloves, and his black hair, now out of curl and flowing over his shoulders, showed it had been dressed a la Caracalla, a fashion introduced as much by David’s school of painting as by the mania for Greek and Roman styles that characterized the early years of the century.

In spite of the noise made by a few market gardeners, who, late, rattled past toward the great market-place at a gallop, the busy street lay in a stillness known only to those who have wandered through deserted Paris at hours when its roar, hushed, rises and spreads in the distance like the great voice of the sea. This strange young man must have seemed as curious to the shopkeeping folk of the “Cat and Racket” as the sign was to him. A dazzlingly white cravat rendered his anxious face paler than it was. The fire that flashed in his black eyes, gloomy and sparkling by turns, matched the singular outline of his features, with a wide, flexible mouth hardened into a smile. His forehead, knit with violent annoyance, had a stamp of doom. Is not the forehead the most prophetic feature of a man? When the stranger’s brow expressed passion the furrows formed were terrible in strength and energy; but when he recovered his calm, so easily upset, it beamed with a luminous grace that gave great attractiveness to a countenance in which joy, grief, love, anger, or scorn blazed so contagiously that the coldest man could not fail to be impressed.

He was so thoroughly vexed when the dormer-window of the loft was suddenly flung open that he did not observe the apparition of three laughing faces, pink, white, and chubby, as vulgar as the face of Commerce as seen in sculpture on certain monuments. These three faces, framed by the window, recalled the puffy cherubs floating among clouds around God the Father. The apprentices snuffed up the street’s exhalations with eagerness that showed how hot and poisonous their garret’s atmosphere must be. After pointing to the singular sentinel, the most jovial of the apprentices retired and came back holding an instrument whose hard metal pipe is now superseded by a leather tube; they all grinned with mischief as they looked down on the loiterer and sprinkled him with a fine white shower whose scent proved that three chins had just been shaved. Standing on tiptoe in the farthest corner of their loft to enjoy their victim’s rage, the lads ceased laughing on seeing the haughty indifference with which the young man shook his cloak and the intense contempt on his face as he glanced up at the empty window-frame.

At this moment a slender white hand threw up the lower half of one of the clumsy windows on the third floor by the aid of sash runners, whose pulleys often suddenly give way and release the heavy panes they should hold up. The watcher was rewarded for his long wait. The face of a young girl appeared, as fresh as one of the white cups that bloom on water, crowned by a frill of tumbled muslin that gave her head an air of exquisite innocence. Though wrapped in brown stuff, her neck and shoulders gleamed here and there through little openings left by her movements in sleep. No embarrassment marred the candor of her face or the calm look of eyes immortalized long since in the sublime works of Raphael; here were the same grace and repose as in those Virgins now proverbial. There was a delightful contrast between cheeks on which sleep had, as it were, given high relief to a superabundance of life, and the antiquity of the heavy window with its clumsy shape and black sill. Like day-blowing flowers that have not yet unfurled their cups, twisted by the night’s chills, the girl, hardly awake, let her blue eyes wander beyond the neighboring roofs to the sky; then, by habit, she cast them down on the gloomy depths of the street, where they immediately met those of her adorer. Vanity, no doubt, distressed her at being seen undressed; she started back, the worn pulley gave way, and the sash fell with a rapid run which in our day has earned for this artless invention of our forefathers the odious name Fenetre a la Guillotine. The vision had disappeared. To the young man the most radiant morning star seemed hidden by a cloud.

During these incidents the heavy inside shutters that protected the slight shop windows of the “Cat and Racket” had been removed as if by magic. The old door with its knocker was opened back against the entry wall by a man-servant, apparently coeval with the sign, who, with a shaking hand, hung upon it a square of cloth embroidered in yellow silk with the words: “Guillaume, successor to Chevrel.” Many a passer-by would have found it difficult to guess Monsieur Guillaume’s trade. Between the strong iron bars that protected his shop windows, certain packages wrapped in brown linen were hardly visible, though as numerous as herrings in a shoal. Notwithstanding the primitive aspect of the Gothic front, Monsieur Guillaume, of all the clothiers in Paris, was the one whose stores were always best provided, whose connections were the most extensive, and whose commercial honesty never lay under the slightest suspicion. If some brethren in business made a contract with the Government and lacked the required quantity of cloth, he was always ready to deliver it, however large the number of pieces tendered. The wily dealer knew a thousand ways of extracting the largest profits without being obliged, like them, to court patrons, cringe to them, or make costly presents. When his fellow-tradesmen could only pay in good bills of long date, he would mention his notary as accommodating, and managed to get a second profit out of the bargain—an arrangement that made a proverb among the traders of the Rue Saint-Denis: “Heaven preserve you from Monsieur Guillaume’s notary!” to signify a heavy discount.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The old merchant was to be seen standing on the threshold of his shop, as if by a miracle, the instant the servant withdrew. Monsieur Guillaume surveyed the Rue Saint-Denis, the neighboring shops, and the weather like a man disembarking at Havre and seeing France again after a long voyage. Having convinced himself that nothing had changed, he perceived the stranger on guard; the young man, for his part, gazed at the patriarchal draper as Humboldt might have scrutinized his first electric eel in America. Monsieur Guillaume wore loose black velvet breeches, pepper-and-salt stockings, and square-toed shoes with silver buckles. His coat, with square-cut fronts, tails, and collar, clothed his slightly bent figure in greenish cloth, finished with white metal buttons, tawny from wear. His gray hair was so accurately combed and flattened over his yellow pate that it looked like a furrowed field. His little green eyes, that might have been pierced with a gimlet, flashed beneath arches faintly tinged with red where eyebrows should be. Anxieties had wrinkled his forehead with as many horizontal lines as there were creases in his coat. This colorless face expressed patience, commercial shrewdness, and the wily cupidity needful in business. At that time such old families were less rare; their characteristic habits and costume survived amid more recent civilization as cherished traditions, like the antediluvian remains Cuvier found in the quarries.

The head of the Guillaume family was a notable upholder of ancient practices; he might be heard to regret the Provost of Merchants, and never mentioned a decision of the Tribunal of Commerce without calling it the Sentence of the Consuls. Up and dressed first in the household, he stood sternly awaiting the appearance of his three assistants, ready to scold them if late. These apprentices knew nothing more terrible than the wordless scrutiny with which the master inspected their faces and movements on Monday for traces of pranks. But at that moment the old clothier paid no heed to his apprentices; he was absorbed in trying to divine why the young man in silk stockings and a cloak kept casting anxious looks at his signboard and into the depths of his shop. Brighter daylight enabled the stranger to discern the cashier’s corner, railed and screened by old green silk curtains, where immense ledgers, the silent oracles of the house, were kept. The inquisitive gazer seemed to covet this nook, sketching a side dining-room lit by a skylight from which the family at meals could easily see the smallest incident at the shop-door. So much affection for his dwelling seemed suspicious to a trader who remembered the law of maximum prices; Monsieur Guillaume naturally thought this sinister person had an eye to the till of the Cat and Racket. After observing the mute duel between master and stranger, the eldest apprentice, seeing the young man stealthily watch the third-floor windows, stepped onto the stone flag beside Guillaume. He stepped into the street, raised his head, and fancied he saw Mademoiselle Augustine retreating hastily. Annoyed, Guillaume glanced at him; both he and his amorous apprentice were suddenly relieved of the fears the young man's presence had excited. The stranger hailed a hackney and jumped in with an air of affected indifference. His departure relieved the other two lads, uneasy about meeting their practical joke's victim.

“Well, gentlemen, what ails you that you are standing there with your arms folded?” said Monsieur Guillaume to his three neophytes. “In former days, bless you, when I was in Master Chevrel’s service, I should have overhauled more than two pieces of cloth by this time.”

“Then it was daylight earlier,” said the second assistant, whose duty this was.

The old shopkeeper could not help smiling. Though two of these young fellows, entrusted to his care by fathers who were rich manufacturers at Louviers and Sedan, had only to ask and would have a hundred thousand francs the day they were old enough to settle, Guillaume regarded it his duty to keep them under the rod of an old-world despotism, unknown nowadays in the showy modern shops where apprentices expect to be rich at thirty. He made them work like Negroes. These three could do the work of ten clerks whose sybaritic tastes now swell the budget. Not a sound disturbed this solemn house; hinges were oiled, and even the meanest furniture showed the cleanliness of strict order and economy. The most waggish of the trio amused himself by writing the date of its first appearance on the Gruyere cheese left for breakfast, which they then left untouched. Such mischief sometimes brought a smile to the younger daughter, the pretty maiden who had just appeared to the bewitched man in the street.

Though each apprentice paid a round sum for board, none would have dared remain at the master's table at dessert; when Madame Guillaume spoke of dressing the salad, they trembled at her thrift with oil. They never spent a night away without long beforehand giving a plausible reason. Every Sunday, in turn, two of them accompanied the Guillaume family to Mass and vespers at Saint-Leu. Mesdemoiselles Virginie and Augustine, simply attired in cotton print, each took an apprentice's arm and walked ahead under their mother's piercing eye, who closed the little procession with her husband, carrying two large black-morocco prayer-books. The second apprentice received no salary; the eldest, after twelve years' perseverance and discretion, was paid eight hundred francs a year. On certain family festivals he received small gifts whose value Madame Guillaume alone enhanced—netted purses she stuffed with cotton wool to show the fancy stitches, braces of the strongest make, or heavy silk stockings. Sometimes, rarely, this prime minister was admitted to share the family's pleasures—going into the country or, after months, taking a theatre box to command a piece Paris had already forgotten.

The barrier of respect that once divided a master draper from his apprentices made them more likely to steal a piece of cloth than to breach etiquette; such reserve may now seem ridiculous, but these old houses were a school of honesty and sound morals. The masters adopted their apprentices: the young man's linen was cared for and mended by the mistress of the house; if an apprentice fell ill he received truly maternal attention. In danger the master lavished money on the best physicians, for he was accountable not only to parents for good conduct and training. If one of them of unimpeachable character suffered misfortune, these tradesmen valued his intelligence and did not hesitate to entrust their daughters' happiness to men they had long trusted with their fortunes. Guillaume was of this old school; if he had their ridiculous side, he had all their good qualities. Joseph Lebas, the chief assistant, an orphan without fortune, was in his mind destined to marry Virginie, his elder daughter. But Joseph did not share his master's symmetrical ideas—he would not, for an empire, have his second daughter married before the elder. The unhappy assistant felt his heart wholly given to Mademoiselle Augustine, the younger. To explain this secret passion, it is necessary to look further into the springs of the absolute government that ruled the cloth-merchant’s household.

Guillaume had two daughters. The elder, Mademoiselle Virginie, was the very image of her mother. Madame Guillaume, daughter of the Sieur Chevrel, sat so upright behind her desk that more than once some wag bet she was a stuffed figure. Her long, thin face betrayed exaggerated piety. Lacking attractions or amiability, Madame Guillaume, nearly sixty, wore an unvarying cap with long lappets like a widow's. In the neighborhood she was known as the “portress nun.” Her speech was curt, and her movements had the stiff precision of a semaphore. Her eye, with a gleam like a cat’s, seemed to spite the world because she was so ugly. Mademoiselle Virginie, brought up under her mother's domestic rule, had reached twenty-eight. Youth softened the graceless effect of her likeness to her mother, but maternal austerity had endowed her with two great qualities: patience and gentleness. Mademoiselle Augustine, eighteen, resembled neither parent. She was delicately made, full of gracious candor; a man of the world might have found only a petty coarseness of gesture or a want of ease. Her placid face was often full of the transient melancholy that comes over young girls too weak to dare resist their mother's will.

Always plainly dressed, the sisters could gratify the vanity innate to womanhood only by a luxury of cleanliness that suited them wonderfully and blended with the polished counters and shining shelves, on which the old man-servant never left a speck of dust, and with the old-world simplicity of all they saw. Their style of living compelled them to find happiness in persistent work; Augustine and Virginie had hitherto satisfied their mother, who secretly prided herself on their perfect characters. Trained for a commercial life, hearing only dreary trade arguments, taught merely grammar, bookkeeping, a little Bible-history, and the history of France in Le Ragois, and reading only what their mother sanctioned, their ideas had little scope. They knew housecraft, prices, the difficulty of amassing money; they were economical and respected the qualities that make a man of business. Though their father was rich, they were as skilled in darning as in embroidery; their mother often spoke of teaching them to cook so they might know how to order a dinner and scold a cook with authority. They knew nothing of the world's pleasures; seeing how their parents lived, they rarely let their eyes wander beyond the walls of their hereditary home, which to their mother was the whole universe. Family anniversaries furnished the future of earthly joy to them.

When the great drawing-room on the second floor was prepared to receive company—Madame Roguin, Demoiselle Chevrel (fifteen months younger and bedecked with diamonds); young Rabourdin of the Finance Office; Monsieur Cesar Birotteau, the rich perfumer, and his wife; Monsieur Camusot, the richest silk mercer in the Rue des Bourdonnais, with his father-in-law Monsieur Cardot, two or three old bankers, and some immaculate ladies—the arrangements required by the way everything was packed away (the plate, the Dresden china, the candlesticks, and the glass) varied the monotonous lives of the three women, who labored like nuns to receive their bishop. That evening, tired from wiping, rubbing, unpacking, and arranging the festival gauds, as the girls helped their mother undress, Madame Guillaume would say, “Children, we have done nothing today.”

On very great occasions when the “portress nun” allowed dancing, restricting boston, whist, and backgammon to her bedroom, such a concession was the greatest felicity and made them happier than the two or three grand balls Guillaume would take them to at Carnival. Once a year the worthy draper gave an entertainment and spared no expense. However rich or fashionable the guests, they were careful not to be absent; the most important houses on the exchange relied on Monsieur Guillaume's immense credit, fortune, or experience. Still, the merchant’s daughters did not profit much from the world’s lessons. At these parties, which the ledger recorded as credits of the house, they wore dresses so shabby they blushed. Their dancing was unremarkable, and their mother's surveillance did not permit conversation with partners beyond Yes and No. The Cat and Racket's law required them to be home by eleven, the hour when balls begin to be lively. Thus their pleasures, which seemed to match their father's position, were often made insipid by circumstances rooted in family habits and principles.

As to their usual life: Madame Guillaume required her daughters to be dressed very early, to come down each day at the same hour, and she ordered their employments with monastic regularity. Augustine, however, had a spirit lofty enough to feel the emptiness of such a life. Her blue eyes would sometimes be raised as if to pierce the depths of that gloomy staircase and those damp store-rooms. After sounding the profound cloistral silence, she seemed to be listening to remote, inarticulate revelations of a life of passion that values feelings above things. At such moments her cheek would flush, her idle hands would lay the muslin sewing on the polished oak counter, and her mother, in a sour voice, would ask, “Augustine, my treasure, what are you thinking about?” It is possible that two romances Augustine had discovered in the cupboard of a cook Madame Guillaume had lately discharged—Hippolyte Comte de Douglas and Le Comte de Comminges—contributed to develop the ideas of the young girl, which she devoured in secret during the long winter nights.

Augustine’s expression of vague longing, her gentle voice, her jasmine skin, and her blue eyes had kindled in poor Lebas’s soul a flame as ardent as it was reverent. From an easily understood caprice, Augustine felt no affection for the orphan; perhaps she did not know he loved her. On the other hand, the senior apprentice—long-legged, chestnut-haired, with big hands and a powerful frame—had a secret admirer in Mademoiselle Virginie, who, despite her dower of fifty thousand crowns, had as yet no suitor. Nothing could be more natural than these two passions at cross-purposes, born in the silence of the dingy shop, as violets bloom in the depths of a wood. The mute and constant looks that made the young people’s eyes meet by sheer need of change amid persistent work and cloistered peace would sooner or later give rise to love. The habit of always seeing the same face leads insensibly to reading there the qualities of the soul and at last effaces all its defects.

“At the pace at which that man goes, our girls will soon have to go on their knees to a suitor!” said Monsieur Guillaume to himself, as he read the first decree by which Napoleon drew in advance on the conscript classes.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
From that day the old merchant, grieved at seeing his eldest daughter fade, remembered how he had married Mademoiselle Chevrel under much the same circumstances as Joseph Lebas and Virginie. It was a good piece of business: to marry off his daughter and discharge a sacred debt by repaying to an orphan the benefit he had once received from his predecessor. Joseph Lebas, now three-and-thirty, knew the obstacle a difference of fifteen years placed between Augustine and himself. Being clear-sighted enough to understand Monsieur Guillaume’s purpose, he felt sure the second would never marry before the elder. So the hapless assistant, whose heart was warm and whose body vigorous, suffered in silence.

This was the state of affairs in the tiny republic in the heart of the Rue Saint-Denis, not unlike a dependency of La Trappe. But to give a full account of events and feelings, it is needful to go back some months before the scene with which this story opens. At dusk a young man passing the darkened shop of the Cat and Racket paused to gaze at a picture which might have arrested any painter. The shop, not yet lighted, was a dark cave beyond which the dining-room was visible. A hanging lamp shed the yellow light that lends such charm to Dutch pictures. The white linen, silver, and cut glass were brilliant accessories, made more picturesque by strong contrasts of light and shade. The figures of the head of the family and his wife, the faces of the apprentices, and the pure form of Augustine, near whom a fat, chubby-cheeked maid stood, formed a strange group; the heads were singular, each face candid; so easy to read the peace, the silence, the modest way of life in this family that to an artist accustomed to render nature any attempt to depict this chance scene would seem hopeless.

The stranger was a young painter who, seven years before, had gained the first prize for painting. He had just returned from Rome. His soul, sated with poetry and his eyes with Raphael and Michael Angelo, thirsted for real nature after long dwelling in the pompous land where art everywhere bears something grandiose. His heart, long prey to the fire of Italian passion, craved one of those modest, meditative maidens whom in Rome he had seen only in painting. Enthusiasm produced by the living picture before him passed naturally to profound admiration for the principal figure; Augustine seemed pensive and did not eat; by the lamp the light fell full on her face, and her bust seemed to move in a circle of fire, which threw up the shape of her head and illuminated it with almost supernatural effect. The artist involuntarily compared her to an exiled angel dreaming of heaven. A strange, limpid love flooded his heart. After a minute, overwhelmed, he tore himself away, went home, ate nothing, and could not sleep.

The next day he went to his studio and did not leave it until he had put on canvas the magic of the scene that memory had made him a devotee of; his happiness was incomplete until he possessed a faithful portrait of his idol. He went many times past the house of the Cat and Racket; he even ventured in once or twice in disguise to get a closer view of the bewitching creature whom Madame Guillaume covered with her wing. For eight months, devoted to love and brush, he was lost to friends, forgetting the theatre, poetry, music, and all his habits. One morning Girodet broke through the barriers artists use, entered his room, and woke him by asking, “What are you going to send to the Salon?” The artist grasped his friend’s hand, dragged him to the studio, and uncovered a small easel picture and a portrait. After a long, eager study of the two works, Girodet threw himself on his comrade’s neck and hugged him without speaking. His feelings could only be expressed soul to soul.

“You are in love?” said Girodet.

They both knew that the finest portraits by Titian, Raphael, and Leonardo were outcomes of the enthusiastic sentiments which engender masterpieces. The artist only bent his head in reply.

“How happy you are to be in love here, after coming back from Italy! But I do not advise you to send such works to the Salon,” Girodet went on. “These two works will not be appreciated. Such true coloring, such prodigious labor, cannot yet be understood; the public is not accustomed to such depths. The pictures we paint, my dear fellow, are mere screens. We should do better to turn rhymes and translate the antique poets! There is more glory there than from our luckless canvases!”

Notwithstanding this advice, the two pictures were exhibited. The Interior revolutionized painting. It gave birth to the genre pictures that now pour into exhibitions in such quantity they seem machine-made. As to the portrait, few artists have forgotten that lifelike work; the public, sometimes discerning, awarded it the crown Girodet himself had hung over it. The two pictures were surrounded by a vast throng. They fought for places, as women say. Speculators and moneyed men would have covered the canvas with double napoleons, but the artist obstinately refused to sell or to make replicas. An enormous sum was offered for the right to engrave them, and the print-sellers were not more favored than the amateurs.

Though these incidents occupied the world, they did not penetrate the monastic solitude of the Rue Saint-Denis. However, when paying a visit to Madame Guillaume, Madame Roguin, the notary’s wife, spoke of the exhibition before Augustine, of whom she was very fond. Her gossip inspired Augustine with a wish to see the pictures and courage enough to ask her cousin secretly to take her to the Louvre. Her cousin negotiated with Madame Guillaume to release Augustine for two hours from her dull labors. Augustine thus made her way through the crowd to see the famed work. A fit of trembling shook her like an aspen as she recognized herself. She was terrified and looked about to find Madame Roguin, from whom she had been separated by a tide of people. At that moment her frightened eyes fell on the impassioned face of the young painter. She at once recalled the figure of a loiterer whom, curious, she had frequently observed, believing him to be a new neighbor.

“You see how love has inspired me,” said the artist in the timid creature’s ear, and she stood in dismay at the words.

She found courage to push through the crowd and join her cousin, still struggling with the mass of people.

“You will be stifled!” cried Augustine. “Let us go.”

But there are moments at the Salon when two women cannot freely direct their steps. By the course compelled by the press, Mademoiselle Guillaume and her cousin were pushed within a few steps of the second picture. Chance brought them to where they could easily see the canvas made famous by fashion, once in agreement with talent. Madame Roguin’s exclamation was lost in the hubbub; Augustine involuntarily shed tears at the sight of the wonderful study. Then, by an almost unaccountable impulse, she laid her finger on her lips as she perceived near her the ecstatic face of the young painter. The stranger replied by a nod and pointed to Madame Roguin as a spoil-sport, to show Augustine he had understood. This pantomime struck the young girl like hot coals; she felt guilty as she perceived a compact between herself and the artist. Suffocating heat, dazzling dresses, the truth of coloring, the multitude of living or painted figures, and the profusion of gilt frames intoxicated and doubled her alarms. She might have fainted if an unknown rapture had not surged up in her heart to vivify her whole being despite the chaos of sensations. She believed herself under the power of the Devil, warned by the thundering words of preachers. It was a moment of madness. She found herself accompanied to her cousin’s carriage by the young man, radiant. Augustine, prey to a new agitation and intoxication that seemed to abandon her to nature, listened to the eloquent voice of her heart and kept looking at the young painter, betraying the emotion that came over her. Never had the bright rose of her cheeks shown in stronger contrast with the whiteness of her skin. The artist saw her beauty and maiden modesty in full bloom. She felt rapture mingled with terror thinking her presence had brought happiness to him whose name was on every lip and whose talent lent immortality to transient scenes. She was loved! It was impossible to doubt. After he vanished, his simple words “You see how love has inspired me!” still echoed in her ear. Her throbbing heart felt a pain; her heated blood revealed unknown forces in her being. She feigned a severe headache to avoid replying to her cousin’s questions about the pictures; but on their return Madame Roguin told Madame Guillaume of the fame that had fallen on the house of the Cat and Racket, and Augustine quaked as her mother said she should go to the Salon to see her house there. The young girl again declared herself unwell and was allowed to go to bed.

“That is what comes of sight-seeing,” exclaimed Monsieur Guillaume. “A headache. And is it so very amusing to see in a picture what you can see any day in your own street? Don’t talk to me of your artists! Like writers, they are a starveling crew. Why the devil must they choose my house to flout in their pictures?”

“It may help to sell a few ells more of cloth,” said Joseph Lebas.

This remark did not protect art from being condemned once again before the judgment-seat of trade. These speeches gave Augustine little hope; that night she gave herself to the first meditations of love. The day’s events were like a dream and a joy to recall. She was initiated into the fears, hopes, and remorse—the ebb and flow of feeling that toss the heart of one so simple and timid. She perceived the void in the gloomy house and the treasure in her soul: to be the wife of a genius, to share his glory. What ravages must such a vision make in the heart of a girl brought up in such a family, and what hopes must it raise in one who, amid sordid elements, had pined for elegance! A sunbeam had fallen into the prison. Augustine was suddenly in love. So many of her feelings were soothed that she succumbed without reflection. At eighteen, does not love hold a prism between a girl’s eyes and the world? She could not suspect the hard facts that result from the union of a loving woman with a man of imagination, and she believed herself called to make him happy, seeing no disparity between them. To her the future would be as the present. Next day, when her parents returned from the Salon, their dejected faces showed disappointment. The painter had removed the two pictures, and Madame Guillaume had lost her cashmere shawl. But the news that the pictures had disappeared since her visit revealed to Augustine a delicacy of sentiment which a woman can always appreciate, even by instinct.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
On the morning when, on his way home from a ball, Theodore de Sommervieux—the name fame had stamped on Augustine’s heart—was squirted on by the apprentices while awaiting his artless little friend (who did not know he was there), the lovers had seen each other for the fourth time only since their meeting at the Salon. The house rules’ obstacles added violence to the painter’s passion for Augustine.

How could he get near a young girl seated in a counting-house between Mademoiselle Virginie and Madame Guillaume? How correspond with her when her mother never left her side? Ingenious as lovers are in imagining woes, Theodore fancied a rival in one of the assistants, supposing the others devoted to that man. If he evaded these sons of Argus, he would yet be detected under the stern eye of the old draper or of Madame Guillaume. The vehemence of his passion hindered him from hitting on the expedients which, in prisoners and in lovers, are the last efforts of intelligence spurred by craving for liberty or by love. Theodore wandered the neighborhood with a madman’s restlessness, as though movement might inspire invention. After racking his imagination, he bribed the blowsy waiting-maid with gold. Thus a few notes were exchanged at long intervals during the fortnight following the ill-starred morning when Monsieur Guillaume and Theodore had so scrutinized one another. At present the young couple had agreed to meet at a certain hour and on Sunday at Saint-Leu, during Mass and vespers. Augustine had sent Theodore a list of family relations and friends, to whom the painter tried to gain access, hoping to interest in his love some soul absorbed in money and trade, to whom genuine passion must seem a monstrous speculation. Nothing meanwhile changed at the sign of the Cat and Racket. If Augustine was absent-minded, stole up to her room to make signals by a jar of flowers, sighed, or was lost in thought, no one observed it, not even her mother. This may surprise those who know the household spirit, where any poetic idea would startle; yet the quiet barque navigating the stormy waters of the Paris Exchange, under the Cat and Racket, was now in the toils of one of those periodic tempests. For the last fortnight the five men forming the crew, with Madame Guillaume and Mademoiselle Virginie, had been devoting themselves to stock-taking.

Every bale was turned and measured to ascertain the exact value of the remnant. Tickets attached to each parcel were examined to see when the piece had been bought. Retail prices were fixed. Monsieur Guillaume, always on his feet, pen behind his ear, was like a captain commanding the ship’s workings. His sharp tones, spoken through a trap-door to inquire into the cellar-store, gave utterance to the barbarous formulas of trade-jargon, expressed only in cipher. “How much H. N. Z.?”—“All sold.”—“What is left of Q. X.?”—“Two ells.”—“At what price?”—“Fifty-five three.”—“Set down A. at three, with all of J. J., all of M. P., and what is left of V. D. O.” A hundred other injunctions equally unintelligible were spouted over the counters like modern poetry quoted by romantic spirits to excite enthusiasm for one of their poets. In the evening Guillaume, shut up with his assistant and wife, balanced accounts, carried the balance, wrote to debtors in arrears, and made out bills. All three were busy over this enormous labor, whose result could be stated on foolscap: so much to the good in hard cash, so much in goods, so much in bills and notes; that he did not owe a sou; that a hundred or two hundred thousand francs were owing to him; that capital had been increased; that farmlands, houses, or investments were extended or repaired. Hence it became necessary to begin again with increased ardor to accumulate crown-pieces, without these laborious ants ever asking—“To what end?”

Favored by this annual turmoil, Augustine escaped the investigations of her Argus-eyed relations. At last, one Saturday evening, stock-taking was finished. The figures showed a row of 0’s long enough to allow Guillaume once to relax the stern rule as to dessert. The shrewd old draper rubbed his hands and allowed his assistants to remain at table. They had hardly swallowed a thimbleful of some home-made liqueur when the rumble of a carriage was heard. The family party were going to see Cendrillon at the Variétés, while the two younger apprentices each received a crown of six francs, with permission to go wherever they pleased, provided they were in by midnight.

Notwithstanding this debauch, the old cloth-merchant was shaving at six next morning, put on his maroon coat, fastened gold buckles on knee-straps of his ample satin breeches; and at about seven, while all were still sleeping, he went to the little office adjoining the shop. Daylight came through a window fortified by iron bars, looking out on a small yard surrounded by black walls like a well. The old merchant opened the iron-lined shutters and threw up the lower sash. The icy air cooled the hot little room full of the peculiar office odor.

The merchant stood, hand on the greasy arm of a large morocco-lined cane chair, hesitated to sit, and looked with affection at the double desk where his wife’s seat opposite his own was fitted into a niche. He contemplated numbered boxes, files, implements, the cash-box—objects of immemorial origin—and fancied himself with the shade of Master Chevrel. He even pulled out the high stool on which he had once sat before his departed master. This stool, covered with black leather, horse-hair showing at every corner, he placed shaking on the spot where his predecessor had put it, and then, with emotion, pulled a bell that rang at Joseph Lebas’ bed. After that decisive blow, the old man, perhaps overcome, took up bills of exchange and looked at them without seeing them.

Suddenly Joseph Lebas stood before him.

“Sit down there,” said Guillaume, pointing to the stool.

As the old master had never yet bid his assistant be seated in his presence, Joseph was startled.

“What do you think of these notes?” asked Guillaume.

“They will never be paid.”

“Why?”

“Well, I heard the day before yesterday Etienne and Co. had made their payments in gold.”

“Oh, oh!” said the draper. “One must be very ill to show one’s bile. Let us speak of something else.—Joseph, stock-taking is done.”

“Yes, monsieur, and the dividend is one of the best you have ever made.”

“Do not use new-fangled words. Say the profits, Joseph. Do you know, my boy, this result is partly owing to you? And I do not intend to pay you a salary any longer. Madame Guillaume has suggested taking you into partnership.—‘Guillaume and Lebas’; will that not make a good name? We might add, ‘and Co.’ to round off the firm’s signature.”

Tears rose to Joseph’s eyes, which he tried to hide.

“Oh, Monsieur Guillaume, how have I deserved such kindness? I only do my duty. It was so much already that you should take interest in a poor orph—”

He brushed his cuff and dared not look at the old man, who smiled, thinking the modest young fellow needed, as he had, encouragement.

“To be sure,” said Virginie’s father, “you do not altogether deserve this favor, Joseph. You have not so much confidence in me as I have in you.” (The young man looked up quickly.) “You know all the cash-box secrets. For two years I have told you almost all my concerns. I have sent you to travel in our goods. In short, I have nothing on my conscience as regards you. But you—you have a soft place, and you have never breathed a word.” Joseph blushed. “Ah-ha! So you thought you could deceive an old fox like me? When you knew I had scented the Lecocq bankruptcy?”

“What, monsieur?” replied Joseph, looking keenly at his master, “you knew I was in love?”

“I know everything, you rascal,” said the worthy old merchant, pulling the assistant’s ear. “And I forgive you—I did the same myself.”

“And you will give her to me?”

“Yes—with fifty thousand crowns; I will leave you as much by will, and we will start our new career under a new firm name. We will do good business yet, my boy!” added the old man, getting up and flourishing his arms. “I tell you, son-in-law, there is nothing like trade. Those who ask what pleasure is to be found in it are simpletons. To be on the scent of a good bargain, to hold your own on Change, to watch anxiously whether Etienne and Co. will fail, to see a regiment of Guards march past all dressed in your cloth, to trip your neighbor up—honestly, of course!—to make goods cheaper than others; then to carry out an undertaking you planned, which begins, grows, totters, and succeeds! to know every house of business’s workings as a minister of police, never to make a mistake; to hold up your head amid wrecks, to have friends by correspondence in every manufacturing town—is not that a perpetual game? That is life! I shall die in that harness like old Chevrel, but taking it easy now, all the same.”

In his rhetoric, Guillaume hardly looked at his assistant, who wept copiously. “Why, Joseph, my poor boy, what is the matter?”

“Oh, I love her so! Monsieur Guillaume, my heart fails me; I believe—”

“Well, well, boy,” said the old man, touched, “you are happier than you know, by God! For she loves you. I know it.”

He blinked his little green eyes at the young man.

“Mademoiselle Augustine! Mademoiselle Augustine!” exclaimed Joseph in rapture.

He was about to rush out when a hand of iron clutched him, and his astonished master spun him round before him once more.

“What has Augustine to do with this matter?” he asked, in a voice that froze Joseph.

“Is it not she that—that—I love?” stammered the assistant.

Much put out by his lack of perspicacity, Guillaume sat down and rested his long head in his hands to consider the perplexing position. Joseph, shamefaced and despairing, remained standing.

“Joseph,” the draper said with frigid dignity, “I was speaking of Virginie. Love cannot be made to order. I know, too, that you can be trusted. We will forget this. I will not let Augustine marry before Virginie.—Your interest will be ten per cent.”

The young man, to whom love gave a strange eloquence, clasped his hand and spoke for a quarter of an hour with such warmth that he altered the situation. If the question had been business, the old tradesman would have had fixed principles; but tossed a thousand miles from commerce on the ocean of sentiment, without a compass, he floated undecided. Carried away by fatherly kindness, he began to beat about the bush.

“Deuce take it, Joseph, you must know there are ten years between my two children. Mademoiselle Chevrel was no beauty, still she had nothing to complain of in me. Do as I did. Come, don’t cry. Can you be so silly? What is to be done? It can be managed perhaps. There is always some way out of a scrape. And we men are not always devoted Celadons to our wives—you understand? Madame Guillaume is very pious... Come. By Gad, boy, give your arm to Augustine this morning as we go to Mass.”

These phrases, spoken at random, concluded in a way that made the lover happy. He was already thinking of a friend as a match for Virginie as he left the smoky office, pressing his future father-in-law’s hand and saying with a knowing look that all would turn out for the best.

“What will Madame Guillaume say?” was the idea that greatly troubled the worthy merchant when alone.

At breakfast Madame Guillaume and Virginie, to whom the draper had not yet confided his disappointment, cast meaning glances at Joseph, who was embarrassed. The young assistant’s bashfulness commended him to his prospective mother-in-law. The matron became so cheerful she smiled at her husband and allowed herself little pleasantries of time-honored acceptance in such simple families. She wondered whether Joseph or Virginie were taller, to ask them to compare height. This fooling brought a cloud to the master’s brow, and he made a point of decorum by desiring Augustine to take the assistant’s arm on their way to Saint-Leu. Madame Guillaume, surprised at this manly delicacy, honored her husband with a nod. So the procession left in such order as to suggest no suspicion to neighbors.

“Does it not seem to you, Mademoiselle Augustine,” said the assistant, trembling, “that the wife of a merchant whose credit is as good as Monsieur Guillaume’s, for instance, might enjoy herself more than Madame your mother does? Might wear diamonds—or keep a carriage? For my part, if I were to marry, I would take all the work and see my wife happy. I would not put her into the counting-house. In drapery a woman is not so necessary now. Monsieur Guillaume was right to act as he did—and his wife liked it. But so long as a woman knows bookkeeping, correspondence, retail business, orders, and housekeeping, so as not to sit idle, that is enough. At seven, when the shop is shut, I shall take my pleasures, go to the play, and into company.—But you are not listening to me.”

“Yes, indeed, Monsieur Joseph. What do you think of painting? That is a fine calling.”

“Yes. I know a master house-painter, Monsieur Lourdois. He is well-to-do.”

Thus conversing, the family reached Saint-Leu. There Madame Guillaume reasserted her rights, and, for the first time, placed Augustine next herself, Virginie on the fourth chair beside Lebas. During the sermon all went well between Augustine and Theodore, who, standing behind a pillar, worshiped his Madonna with fervent devotion; but at the elevation of the Host Madame Guillaume discovered, rather late, that her daughter was holding her prayer-book upside down. She was about to speak when, lowering her veil, she interrupted her devotions to look where her daughter’s eyes found attraction. With her spectacles she saw the young artist, whose fashionable elegance seemed to proclaim him a cavalry officer on leave rather than a neighborhood tradesman. It is difficult to imagine Madame Guillaume’s violent agitation—she who prided herself on having brought up her daughters to perfection—on discovering in Augustine a clandestine passion which her prudery and ignorance exaggerated in peril. She believed her daughter cankered to the core.

“Hold your book right way up, miss,” she muttered in a low voice, tremulous with wrath. She snatched the tell-tale prayer-book and returned it right way up. “Do not allow your eyes to look anywhere but at your prayers,” she added, “or I shall have something to say to you. Your father and I will talk to you after church.”

These words struck poor Augustine. She felt faint; but, torn between distress and dread of causing a commotion, she concealed her anguish. It was easy to see her stormy soul from the trembling of her prayer-book and the tears dropping on each page. From the furious glare Madame Guillaume shot at him, the artist saw the peril of his love; he went out with a raging soul, determined to venture all.

“Go to your room, miss!” said Madame Guillaume on their return; “we will send for you, but take care not to quit it.”

The conference between husband and wife was so secret that at first nothing was heard. Virginie, who had tried to give her sister courage by gentle remonstrances, carried her good nature so far as to listen at her mother’s bedroom door to catch a word or two. The first time down she heard her father exclaim, “Then, madame, do you wish to kill your daughter?”

“My poor dear!” said Virginie in tears, “papa takes your part.”

“And what do they want to do to Theodore?” asked the innocent girl.

Virginie, inquisitive, went down again and stayed longer; she learned that Joseph Lebas loved Augustine. It was written that on this memorable day the usually peaceful house should be a hell. Monsieur Guillaume brought Joseph to despair by telling him of Augustine’s love for a stranger. Lebas, who had advised his friend to court Virginie, saw his hopes wrecked. Virginie, overcome by hearing Joseph had in a way refused her, had a sick headache. The dispute that arose between Monsieur and Madame Guillaume, for the third time in their lives of antagonism, showed itself in a terrible form. Finally, at half-past four, Augustine, pale, trembling, and red-eyed, was hauled before her parents. The poor child artlessly related her brief tale of love. Reassured by a speech from her father, who promised to listen in silence, she gathered courage and pronounced the name Theodore de Sommervieux, with a mischievous emphasis on the aristocratic “de.” Yielding to the unknown charm of talking of her feelings, she declared with innocent decision she loved Monsieur de Sommervieux, had written to him, and added with tears: “To sacrifice me to another man would make me wretched.”

“But, Augustine, you cannot surely know what a painter is?” cried her mother with horror.

“Madame Guillaume!” said the old man, compelling her silence.—“Augustine,” he went on, “artists are generally little better than beggars. They are too extravagant not to be always a bad sort. I served the late Monsieur Joseph Vernet, Monsieur Lekain, and Monsieur Noverre. Oh, if you could only know the tricks played on poor Father Chevrel by Noverre, by the Chevalier de Saint-Georges, and especially by Philidor! They are a set of rascals; I know them well! They all have a gab and nice manners. Ah, your Monsieur Sumer—, Somm—”

“De Sommervieux, papa.”

“Well, well, de Sommervieux. He can never have been half so sweet to you as Monsieur le Chevalier de Saint-Georges was to me the day I got a verdict of the consuls against him. And in those days they were gentlemen of quality.”

“But, father, Monsieur Theodore is of good family, and he wrote me he is rich; his father was called Chevalier de Sommervieux before the Revolution.”

At these words Monsieur Guillaume looked at his terrible better half, who, like an angry woman, sat tapping the floor with her foot while keeping sullen silence; she avoided casting wrathful looks at Augustine, appearing to leave to Monsieur Guillaume the whole responsibility in so grave a matter, since her opinion was not listened to. Nevertheless, seeing her husband give way so mildly under a catastrophe that had no concern with business, she exclaimed:

“Really, monsieur, you are so weak with your daughters! However—”

The sound of a carriage stopping at the door interrupted her. In a minute Madame Roguin stood in the middle of the room, looking at the actors in this domestic scene: “I know all, my dear cousin,” she said, patronizing.

Madame Roguin made the mistake of supposing a Paris notary’s wife could play the part of a fashion favorite.

“I know all,” she repeated, “and I have come into Noah’s Ark, like the dove, with the olive-branch. I read that allegory in the Genie du Christianisme,” she added to Madame Guillaume; “the allusion ought to please you, cousin. Do you know,” she smiled at Augustine, “that Monsieur de Sommervieux is charming? He gave me my portrait this morning, painted by a master’s hand. It is worth at least six thousand francs.” At these words she patted Monsieur Guillaume on the arm. The old draper could not help his peculiar grimace.

“I know Monsieur de Sommervieux very well,” the Dove ran on. “He has come to my evenings this fortnight and made them delightful. He has told me all his woes and commissioned me to plead for him. I know since this morning that he adores Augustine, and he shall have her. Ah, cousin, do not shake your head in refusal. He will be created Baron, I can tell you, and has just been made Chevalier of the Legion of Honor by the Emperor at the Salon. Roguin is now his lawyer, and knows his affairs. Well! Monsieur de Sommervieux has twelve thousand francs a year in good landed estate. Do you know that a father-in-law of such a man may rise in life—become mayor of his arrondissement, for instance. Have we not seen Monsieur Dupont become a Count of the Empire, and a senator, because he went as mayor to congratulate the Emperor on entering Vienna? Oh, this marriage must take place! For my part, I adore the dear young man. His behavior to Augustine is only met in romances. Be easy, little one; you shall be happy, and every girl will wish she were in your place. Madame la Duchesse de Carigliano, who comes to my At Homes, raves about Monsieur de Sommervieux. Some spiteful people say she only comes to me to meet him; as if a duchess of yesterday were doing too much honor to a Chevrel, whose family have been respected citizens these hundred years!

“Augustine,” Madame Roguin went on after a short pause, “I have seen the portrait. Heavens! How lovely it is! Do you know the Emperor wanted it? He laughed and said to the Deputy High Constable that if there were many women like that in his court while all the kings visited it, he should have no difficulty preserving the peace of Europe. Is not that a compliment?”

The day’s tempests were to end in clear weather. Madame Roguin’s address and volubility touched strings in Monsieur and Madame Guillaume’s dry hearts. At this strange period commerce and finance were possessed by a mania for alliance with rank; generals of the Empire took full advantage. Monsieur Guillaume, singularly, opposed this craving. His axioms favored marriage within class; that every one is punished sooner or later for climbing too high; that love cannot endure household worries unless both partners had sound qualities and understood each other—if one spoke Greek and his wife Latin, they might die of hunger. He compared such marriages to mixed silk and wool. Still, vanity prevailed: the pilot who steered the Cat and Racket wisely gave way before Madame Roguin. Austere Madame Guillaume was the first to see in her daughter’s affection a reason to abdicate principles and consent to receive Monsieur de Sommervieux, whom she promised to subject to severe inquisition.

The old draper went to look for Joseph Lebas and inform him. At half-past six the dining-room immortalized by the artist saw, united under its skylight, Monsieur and Madame Roguin, the young painter and his charming Augustine, Joseph Lebas—who found happiness in patience—and Virginie, convalescent from her headache. Monsieur and Madame Guillaume saw in perspective both children married and the Cat and Racket’s fortunes in skilled hands. Their satisfaction was high when, at dessert, Theodore presented the wonderful picture they had failed to see, representing the old shop’s interior, to which they all owed so much happiness.

“Isn’t it pretty!” cried Guillaume. “And to think that any one would pay thirty thousand francs for that!”

“Because you can see my lappets in it,” said Madame Guillaume.

“And the cloth unrolled!” added Lebas; “you might take it up in your hand.”

“Drapery always comes out well,” replied the painter. “We modern artists would be happy if we could touch the perfection of antique drapery.”

“So you like drapery!” cried old Guillaume. “Well, then, by Gad! shake hands, my young friend. Since you can respect trade, we shall understand each other. And why should it be despised? The world began with trade, since Adam sold Paradise for an apple. He did not strike a good bargain though!” The old man roared with honest laughter, encouraged by the champagne, which he sent round liberally. The band that covered the young artist’s eyes was so thick he thought his future parents amiable. He enlivened them with a few jests in good taste and pleased everyone. In the evening, when the drawing-room—furnished with what Madame Guillaume called “everything handsome”—was deserted, while she flitted from table to chimney-piece, blowing out the wax-lights, the clear-sighted draper, always so when money was concerned, called Augustine to him, seated her on his knee, and spoke:

“My dear child, you shall marry your Sommervieux since you insist; you may, if you like, risk your capital in happiness. But I will not be hoodwinked by thirty thousand francs earned by spoiling good canvas. Money lightly earned is lightly spent. Did I not hear that hare-brained youngster declare this evening that money was made round that it might roll? If it is round for spendthrifts, it is flat for saving folks who pile it up. Now, my child, that fine gentleman talks of giving you carriages and diamonds! He has money, let him spend it on you; so be it. It is no concern of mine. But as to what I can give you, I will not have crown-pieces I picked up with toil wasted on frippery. Those who spend too fast never grow rich. A hundred thousand crowns, which is your fortune, will not buy up Paris. It is all very well to look forward to a few hundred thousand francs someday; I shall keep you waiting for them as long as possible, by Gad! So I took your lover aside, and a man who managed the Lecocq bankruptcy had little difficulty persuading the artist to marry under a settlement of his wife’s money on herself. I will keep an eye on the marriage contract to see that what he is to settle on you is safely tied up. So now, my child, I hope to be a grandfather, by Gad! I will begin at once to lay up for my grandchildren; but swear to me, here and now, never to sign money papers without my advice; and if I go soon to join old Father Chevrel, promise to consult young Lebas, your brother-in-law.”

“Yes, father, I swear it.”

At these gentle words the old man kissed his daughter on both cheeks. That night the lovers slept as soundly as Monsieur and Madame Guillaume.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Some few months after this memorable Sunday the high altar of Saint-Leu was the scene of two very different weddings. Augustine and Theodore appeared radiant with happiness, their eyes beaming, elegantly dressed, a fine carriage waiting for them. Virginie, who had come in a hired fly with the rest of the family, humbly followed her younger sister, simply dressed like a shadow in the picture. Monsieur Guillaume had exerted himself in the church to get Virginie married before Augustine, but the priests, high and low, persisted in addressing the more elegant of the two brides. He heard neighbors applaud Mademoiselle Virginie’s prudence in making, as they said, the more substantial match and remaining faithful to the neighborhood, while they fired a few taunts, prompted by envy of Augustine, who was marrying an artist and a man of rank; adding, with a sort of dismay, that if the Guillaumes were ambitious, there was an end to the business. An old fan-maker remarked that such a prodigal would soon bring his wife to beggary; father Guillaume privately prided himself on his prudence in marriage settlements. In the evening, after a splendid ball followed by one of those substantial suppers now fading from memory, Monsieur and Madame Guillaume remained in a fine house in the Rue du Colombier, where the wedding had been held; Monsieur and Madame Lebas returned in their fly to the old home in the Rue Saint-Denis to steer the good ship Cat and Racket. The artist, intoxicated with happiness, carried off his beloved Augustine, and, eagerly lifting her out of their carriage in the Rue des Trois-Freres, led her to an apartment embellished by all the arts.

The fever of passion which possessed Theodore made a year fly over the young couple without a cloud to dim their blue sky. Life did not hang heavy on the lovers’ hands. Theodore lavished on every day inexhaustible fioriture of enjoyment, delighting to vary transports of passion with the soft languor of repose when souls soar so high they seem to forget all bodily union. Augustine was too happy for reflection; she floated on an undulating tide of rapture, thinking she could do nothing but abandon herself to sanctioned and sacred married love; simple and artless, she had no coquetry, no reserves, none of the dominion a worldly-minded girl acquires over her husband by ingenious caprice; she loved too well to calculate for the future, never imagining so exquisite a life could end. Happy in being her husband’s sole delight, she believed her inextinguishable love and her devotion and obedience would always charm him. Indeed, the ecstasy of love had made her so brilliantly lovely that her beauty filled her with pride and confidence that she could always reign over a man so easy to kindle as Monsieur de Sommervieux. Thus her position as a wife brought her no lesson but those of love.

In the midst of her happiness she was still the simple child from obscurity in the Rue Saint-Denis, who never thought of acquiring the manners, information, and tone of the world she had to live in. Her words being words of love revealed a certain pliancy and refinement of speech; but she used the language common to women plunged in passion, which seems their element. When, by chance, Augustine expressed an idea that did not harmonize with Theodore’s, the young artist laughed, as one laughs at a foreigner’s first mistakes, though such laughter can annoy if not corrected.

In spite of all this love-making, by the end of that swift year Sommervieux felt one morning the need to resume his work and old habits. His wife was expecting their first child. He saw friends again. During the tedious discomforts of the year when a young wife nurses an infant for the first time he worked, no doubt, with zeal, but occasionally sought diversion in the fashionable world. The house he most frequented was that of the Duchesse de Carigliano, who at last attracted the celebrated artist to her parties. When Augustine was well again and the boy no longer required the assiduous care that bars a mother from social pleasures, Theodore wished to know the joys of satisfied vanity found in society with a handsome woman, the object of envy and admiration.

To figure in drawing-rooms with the reflected lustre of her husband’s fame and to see other women envious was to Augustine a new harvest of pleasures; but it was the last gleam of conjugal happiness. She first wounded her husband’s vanity when, despite vain efforts, she betrayed her ignorance, the inelegance of her language, and the narrowness of her ideas. Sommervieux’s nature, subjugated for nearly two and a half years by first transports of love, now in the calm of less new possession recovered its bent and habits, for a while diverted. Poetry, painting, and the subtle joys of imagination have inalienable rights over a lofty spirit. These cravings had not been starved in Theodore during those two years; they had only found fresh pasture. As soon as the meadows of love had been ransacked, and the artist had gathered roses and cornflowers so greedily he did not see his hands could hold no more, the scene changed. When the painter showed his wife sketches for his finest compositions he heard her exclaim, as her father had done, “How pretty!” This tepid admiration was not from conscientious feeling but from her faith in love’s strength.

Augustine cared more for a look than for the finest picture. The only sublime she knew was that of the heart. At last Theodore could not resist the cruel evidence—his wife was insensible to poetry; she did not dwell in his sphere, could not follow him in his vagaries, inventions, joys and sorrows; she walked groveling in reality while his head was in the skies. Common minds cannot appreciate the perennial sufferings of a being who, while bound to another by intimate affection, is obliged constantly to suppress the dearest flights of his soul and thrust down into the void those images a magic power compels him to create. To him the torture was all the more intolerable because his feeling towards his companion enjoined that they should have no concealments, but mingle aspirations of thought as perfectly as effusions of soul. The demands of nature are inexorable as necessity, a sort of social nature. Sommervieux took refuge in the peace and silence of his studio, hoping the habit of living with artists might mould his wife and develop dormant germs of lofty intelligence which some superior minds suppose exist in every being. But Augustine was too sincerely religious not to take fright at the tone of artists. At the first dinner Theodore gave, she heard a young painter say, with a childlike lightness to her unintelligible, “But, madame, your Paradise cannot be more beautiful than Raphael’s Transfiguration!—Well, and I got tired of looking at that.”

Thus Augustine entered this sparkling set in a spirit of distrust no one could fail to see. She was a restraint on their freedom. An artist who feels restraint is pitiless; he stays away or laughs it to scorn. Madame Guillaume, among other absurdities, had an excessive notion of the dignity she considered the prerogative of a married woman; and Augustine, though she had often made fun of it, could not help a slight imitation of her mother’s primness. This extreme propriety, which virtuous wives sometimes assume, suggested a few epigrams in sketch form, jests in good taste that Sommervieux could not take offence at; and even if more severe, these were reprisals from his friends. Still, nothing seemed trivial to a spirit so open as Theodore’s to outside impressions. A coldness insensibly crept over him and inevitably spread. To attain conjugal happiness one must climb a hill whose summit is a narrow ridge near a steep, slippery descent: the painter’s love was falling down it. He regarded his wife as incapable of appreciating the moral considerations that justified him in his own eyes for his singular behavior, and believed himself innocent in hiding from her thoughts she could not enter and peccadilloes outside the jurisdiction of a bourgeois conscience. Augustine wrapped herself in sullen and silent grief. These unconfessed feelings placed a shroud between husband and wife that thickened day by day. Though he never failed in consideration, Augustine could not help trembling as she saw he kept for the outer world those treasures of wit and grace he had laid at her feet. She soon found sinister meaning in the jocular speeches current in the world about men’s inconstancy. She made no complaints, but her demeanor conveyed reproach.

Three years after her marriage this pretty young woman, who dashed past in her handsome carriage and lived in a sphere of glory and riches to the envy of heedless folk, was a prey to intense grief. She lost color; she reflected; she compared; then sorrow unfolded the first lessons of experience. She determined to restrict herself bravely to duty, hoping this generous conduct might sooner or later win back her husband’s love. But it was not so. When Sommervieux, fired with work, came in from his studio, Augustine did not put away her knitting so quickly but the painter might find his wife mending household linen and his own with all the care of a good housewife. She supplied generously and without murmur the money needed for his lavishness; but in her anxiety to husband Theodore’s fortune she was strictly economical for herself and in certain domestic details. Such conduct is incompatible with the easy habits of artists, who, at life’s end, having enjoyed ease so keenly, never inquire into the causes of their ruin.

It is useless to note every tint of shadow by which the brilliant hues of their honeymoon were overcast till lost in utter blackness. One evening poor Augustine, who had for some time heard her husband speak with enthusiasm of the Duchesse de Carigliano, received from a friend certain malignantly charitable warnings as to the nature of the attachment Sommervieux had formed for this celebrated flirt of the Imperial Court. At twenty-one, in the splendor of youth and beauty, Augustine saw herself deserted for a woman of thirty-six. Feeling so wretched in a world of festivity that to her was a blank, the poor little thing could no longer understand the admiration she excited or the envy she provoked. Melancholy tinged her features with the sweetness of resignation and the pallor of scorned love. Ere long she too was courted by the most fascinating men; but she remained lonely and virtuous. Some contemptuous words from her husband filled her with indescribable despair. A sinister flash showed breaches which, due to her sordid education, hindered perfect union of soul with Theodore’s; she loved him well enough to absolve him and condemn herself. She shed tears of blood, and perceived too late that there are mesalliances of spirit as well as of rank and habits. As she recalled their early raptures she understood the full extent of that lost happiness, and accepted the conclusion that so rich a harvest of love was in itself a whole life, which only sorrow could pay for. At the same time she loved too truly to lose all hope. At twenty-one she dared to undertake to educate herself and make her imagination, at least, worthy of that she admired. “If I am not a poet,” she thought, “at any rate I will understand poetry.”

With all the strength of will and energy which every woman can display when she loves, Madame de Sommervieux tried to alter her character, manners, and habits; but by devouring books and learning undauntedly she only succeeded in becoming less ignorant. Lightness of wit and the graces of conversation are a gift of nature or the fruit of education begun in the cradle. She could appreciate music and enjoy it, but she could not sing with taste. She understood literature and the beauties of poetry, but it was too late to cultivate her refractory memory. She listened with pleasure to social conversation but could contribute nothing brilliant. Her religious notions and home-grown prejudices were antagonistic to complete emancipation of her intelligence. Finally, a foregone conclusion against her had stolen into Theodore’s mind, and this she could not conquer. The artist would laugh at those who flattered him about his wife, and his irony had some foundation; he so overawed the pathetic young creature that, in his presence or alone with him, she trembled. Hampered by her eager desire to please, her wits and knowledge vanished in one absorbing feeling. Even her fidelity vexed the unfaithful husband, who seemed to bid her do wrong by stigmatizing her virtue as insensibility. Augustine tried in vain to abdicate her reason, to yield to her husband’s caprices, to devote herself to his vanity. Her sacrifices bore no fruit. Perhaps they had both let slip the moment when souls may meet in comprehension. One day the young wife’s too sensitive heart received one of those blows which so strain the bonds of feeling they seem broken. She withdrew into solitude. But before long a fatal idea suggested seeking counsel and comfort in the bosom of her family.

So one morning she made her way towards the grotesque facade of the humble, silent home where she had spent her childhood. She sighed as she looked up at the sash-window whence once she had sent her first kiss to him who now shed as much sorrow as glory on her life. Nothing was changed in the cavern, where the drapery business had, however, started anew. Augustine’s sister filled her mother’s old place at the desk. The unhappy young woman met her brother-in-law with his pen behind his ear; he hardly listened, so full of business. The formidable symptoms of stock-taking were visible around him; he begged her excuse. She was received coldly by her sister, who owed her a grudge. In fact, Augustine in her finery and stepping from a handsome carriage had never been to see her but when passing by. The wife of the prudent Lebas, imagining want of money the prime cause of this early call, tried to keep up a tone of reserve that more than once made Augustine smile. The painter’s wife perceived that, apart from cap and lappets, her mother had found in Virginie a successor who could uphold the ancient honor of the Cat and Racket. At breakfast she observed changes in the house’s management which did honor to Lebas’ good sense; the assistants did not rise before dessert, they were allowed to talk, and the abundant meal spoke of ease without luxury. The fashionable woman found tickets for a box at the Francais where she remembered seeing her sister. Madame Lebas had a cashmere shawl whose value testified to her husband’s generosity. In short, the couple kept pace with the times. During the two-thirds of the day she spent there Augustine was touched by the equable happiness, devoid of emotion but free from storms, enjoyed by this well-matched pair. They had accepted life as a commercial enterprise in which, above all, they must do credit to the business. Not finding great love in his wife, Virginie had set to work to create it. Having by degrees learned to esteem and care for his wife, the time his happiness had taken to germinate was to Joseph Lebas a guarantee of its durability. Hence, when Augustine plaintively set forth her painful position, she faced the deluge of commonplace morality which the traditions of the Rue Saint-Denis furnished.

“The mischief is done, wife,” said Joseph Lebas; “we must try to give our sister good advice.” Then the clever tradesman ponderously analyzed the resources law and custom might offer Augustine as means of escape at this crisis; he ticketed every argument and arranged them in degrees of weight as though articles of merchandise, then put them in the scale, weighed them, and ended by showing the necessity for violent steps which could not satisfy the love she still had for her husband; and indeed the feeling revived in all its strength when she heard Joseph Lebas speak of legal proceedings. Augustine thanked them and returned home even more undecided than before consulting them. She now ventured to go to the house in the Rue du Colombier intending to confide her troubles to her father and mother; for she was like a sick man who, in desperate plight, tries every prescription and even puts faith in old wives’ remedies.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The old people received their daughter with an effusiveness that touched her deeply. Her visit brought them some little change, and that to them was worth a fortune. For the last four years they had gone their way like navigators without a goal or a compass. Sitting by the chimney corner, they would talk over their disasters under the old law of maximum, of their great investments in cloth, of the way they had weathered bankruptcies, and, above all, the famous failure of Lecocq, Monsieur Guillaume’s battle of Marengo. Then, when they had exhausted the tale of lawsuits, they recapitulated the sum total of their most profitable stock-takings, and told each other old stories of the Saint-Denis quarter. At two o’clock old Guillaume went to cast an eye on the business at the Cat and Racket; on his way back he called at all the shops, formerly the rivals of his own, where the young proprietors hoped to inveigle the old draper into some risky discount, which, as was his wont, he never refused point-blank. Two good Normandy horses were dying of their own fat in the stables of the big house; Madame Guillaume never used them but to drag her on Sundays to high Mass at the parish church. Three times a week the worthy couple kept open house. By the influence of his son-in-law Sommervieux, Monsieur Guillaume had been named a member of the consulting board for the clothing of the Army. Since her husband had stood so high in office, Madame Guillaume had decided that she must receive; her rooms were so crammed with gold and silver ornaments, and furniture, tasteless but of undoubted value, that the simplest room in the house looked like a chapel. Economy and expense seemed to be struggling for the upper hand in every accessory. It was as though Monsieur Guillaume had looked to a good investment, even in the purchase of a candlestick. In the midst of this bazaar, where splendor revealed the owner’s want of occupation, Sommervieux’s famous picture filled the place of honor, and in it Monsieur and Madame Guillaume found their chief consolation, turning their eyes, harnessed with eye-glasses, twenty times a day on this presentment of their past life, to them so active and amusing. The appearance of this mansion and these rooms, where everything had an aroma of staleness and mediocrity, the spectacle offered by these two beings, cast away, as it were, on a rock far from the world and the ideas which are life, startled Augustine; she could here contemplate the sequel of the scene of which the first part had struck her at the house of Lebas--a life of stir without movement, a mechanical and instinctive existence like that of the beaver; and then she felt an indefinable pride in her troubles, as she reflected that they had their source in eighteen months of such happiness as, in her eyes, was worth a thousand lives like this; its vacuity seemed to her horrible. However, she concealed this not very charitable feeling, and displayed for her parents her newly-acquired accomplishments of mind, and the ingratiating tenderness that love had revealed to her, disposing them to listen to her matrimonial grievances. Old people have a weakness for this kind of confidence. Madame Guillaume wanted to know the most trivial details of that alien life, which to her seemed almost fabulous. The travels of Baron da la Houtan, which she began again and again and never finished, told her nothing more unheard-of concerning the Canadian savages.

“What, child, your husband shuts himself into a room with naked women! And you are so simple as to believe that he draws them?”

As she uttered this exclamation, the grandmother laid her spectacles on a little work-table, shook her skirts, and clasped her hands on her knees, raised by a foot-warmer, her favorite pedestal.

“But, mother, all artists are obliged to have models.”

“He took good care not to tell us that when he asked leave to marry you. If I had known it, I would never had given my daughter to a man who followed such a trade. Religion forbids such horrors; they are immoral. And at what time of night do you say he comes home?”

“At one o’clock--two----”

The old folks looked at each other in utter amazement.

“Then he gambles?” said Monsieur Guillaume. “In my day only gamblers stayed out so late.”

Augustine made a face that scorned the accusation.

“He must keep you up through dreadful nights waiting for him,” said Madame Guillaume. “But you go to bed, don’t you? And when he has lost, the wretch wakes you.”

“No, mamma, on the contrary, he is sometimes in very good spirits. Not infrequently, indeed, when it is fine, he suggests that I should get up and go into the woods.”

“The woods! At that hour? Then have you such a small set of rooms that his bedroom and his sitting-room are not enough, and that he must run about? But it is just to give you cold that the wretch proposes such expeditions. He wants to get rid of you. Did one ever hear of a man settled in life, a well-behaved, quiet man galloping about like a warlock?”

“But, my dear mother, you do not understand that he must have excitement to fire his genius. He is fond of scenes which----”

“I would make scenes for him, fine scenes!” cried Madame Guillaume, interrupting her daughter. “How can you show any consideration to such a man? In the first place, I don’t like his drinking water only; it is not wholesome. Why does he object to see a woman eating? What queer notion is that! But he is mad. All you tell us about him is impossible. A man cannot leave his home without a word, and never come back for ten days. And then he tells you he has been to Dieppe to paint the sea. As if any one painted the sea! He crams you with a pack of tales that are too absurd.”

Augustine opened her lips to defend her husband; but Madame Guillaume enjoined silence with a wave of her hand, which she obeyed by a survival of habit, and her mother went on in harsh tones: “Don’t talk to me about the man! He never set foot in church excepting to see you and to be married. People without religion are capable of anything. Did Guillaume ever dream of hiding anything from me, of spending three days without saying a word to me, and of chattering afterwards like a blind magpie?”

“My dear mother, you judge superior people too severely. If their ideas were the same as other folks’, they would not be men of genius.”

“Very well, then let men of genius stop at home and not get married. What! A man of genius is to make his wife miserable? And because he is a genius it is all right! Genius, genius! It is not so very clever to say black one minute and white the next, as he does, to interrupt other people, to dance such rigs at home, never to let you know which foot you are to stand on, to compel his wife never to be amused unless my lord is in gay spirits, and to be dull when he is dull.”

“But, mother, the very nature of such imaginations----”

“What are such ‘imaginations’?” Madame Guillaume went on, interrupting her daughter again. “Fine ones his are, my word! What possesses a man that all on a sudden, without consulting a doctor, he takes it into his head to eat nothing but vegetables? If indeed it were from religious motives, it might do him some good--but he has no more religion than a Huguenot. Was there ever a man known who, like him, loved horses better than his fellow-creatures, had his hair curled like a heathen, laid statues under muslin coverlets, shut his shutters in broad day to work by lamp-light? There, get along; if he were not so grossly immoral, he would be fit to shut up in a lunatic asylum. Consult Monsieur Loraux, the priest at Saint Sulpice, ask his opinion about it all, and he will tell you that your husband, does not behave like a Christian.”

“Oh, mother, can you believe----?”

“Yes, I do believe. You loved him, and you can see none of these things. But I can remember in the early days after your marriage. I met him in the Champs-Elysees. He was on horseback. Well, at one minute he was galloping as hard as he could tear, and then pulled up to a walk. I said to myself at that moment, ‘There is a man devoid of judgement.’”

“Ah, ha!” cried Monsieur Guillaume, “how wise I was to have your money settled on yourself with such a queer fellow for a husband!”

When Augustine was so imprudent as to set forth her serious grievances against her husband, the two old people were speechless with indignation. But the word “divorce” was ere long spoken by Madame Guillaume. At the sound of the word divorce the apathetic old draper seemed to wake up. Prompted by his love for his daughter, and also by the excitement which the proceedings would bring into his uneventful life, father Guillaume took up the matter. He made himself the leader of the application for a divorce, laid down the lines of it, almost argued the case; he offered to be at all the charges, to see the lawyers, the pleaders, the judges, to move heaven and earth. Madame de Sommervieux was frightened, she refused her father’s services, said she would not be separated from her husband even if she were ten times as unhappy, and talked no more about her sorrows. After being overwhelmed by her parents with all the little wordless and consoling kindnesses by which the old couple tried in vain to make up to her for her distress of heart, Augustine went away, feeling the impossibility of making a superior mind intelligible to weak intellects. She had learned that a wife must hide from every one, even from her parents, woes for which it is so difficult to find sympathy. The storms and sufferings of the upper spheres are appreciated only by the lofty spirits who inhabit there. In any circumstance we can only be judged by our equals.

Thus poor Augustine found herself thrown back on the horror of her meditations, in the cold atmosphere of her home. Study was indifferent to her, since study had not brought her back her husband’s heart. Initiated into the secret of these souls of fire, but bereft of their resources, she was compelled to share their sorrows without sharing their pleasures. She was disgusted with the world, which to her seemed mean and small as compared with the incidents of passion. In short, her life was a failure.

One evening an idea flashed upon her that lighted up her dark grief like a beam from heaven. Such an idea could never have smiled on a heart less pure, less virtuous than hers. She determined to go to the Duchesse de Carigliano, not to ask her to give her back her husband’s heart, but to learn the arts by which it had been captured; to engage the interest of this haughty fine lady for the mother of her lover’s children; to appeal to her and make her the instrument of her future happiness, since she was the cause of her present wretchedness.

So one day Augustine, timid as she was, but armed with supernatural courage, got into her carriage at two in the afternoon to try for admittance to the boudoir of the famous coquette, who was never visible till that hour. Madame de Sommervieux had not yet seen any of the ancient and magnificent mansions of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. As she made her way through the stately corridors, the handsome staircases, the vast drawing-rooms--full of flowers, though it was in the depth of winter, and decorated with the taste peculiar to women born to opulence or to the elegant habits of the aristocracy, Augustine felt a terrible clutch at her heart; she coveted the secrets of an elegance of which she had never had an idea; she breathed in an air of grandeur which explained the attraction of the house for her husband. When she reached the private rooms of the Duchess she was filled with jealousy and a sort of despair, as she admired the luxurious arrangement of the furniture, the draperies and the hangings. Here disorder was a grace, here luxury affected a certain contempt of splendor. The fragrance that floated in the warm air flattered the sense of smell without offending it. The accessories of the rooms were in harmony with a view, through plate-glass windows, of the lawns in a garden planted with evergreen trees. It was all bewitching, and the art of it was not perceptible. The whole spirit of the mistress of these rooms pervaded the drawing-room where Augustine awaited her. She tried to divine her rival’s character from the aspect of the scattered objects; but there was here something as impenetrable in the disorder as in the symmetry, and to the simple-minded young wife all was a sealed letter. All that she could discern was that, as a woman, the Duchess was a superior person. Then a painful thought came over her.

“Alas! And is it true,” she wondered, “that a simple and loving heart is not all-sufficient to an artist; that to balance the weight of these powerful souls they need a union with feminine souls of a strength equal to their own? If I had been brought up like this siren, our weapons at least might have been equal in the hour of struggle.”

“But I am not at home!” The sharp, harsh words, though spoken in an undertone in the adjoining boudoir, were heard by Augustine, and her heart beat violently.

“The lady is in there,” replied the maid.

“You are an idiot! Show her in,” replied the Duchess, whose voice was sweeter, and had assumed the dulcet tones of politeness. She evidently now meant to be heard.

Augustine shyly entered the room. At the end of the dainty boudoir she saw the Duchess lounging luxuriously on an ottoman covered with brown velvet and placed in the centre of a sort of apse outlined by soft folds of white muslin over a yellow lining. Ornaments of gilt bronze, arranged with exquisite taste, enhanced this sort of dais, under which the Duchess reclined like a Greek statue. The dark hue of the velvet gave relief to every fascinating charm. A subdued light, friendly to her beauty, fell like a reflection rather than a direct illumination. A few rare flowers raised their perfumed heads from costly Sevres vases. At the moment when this picture was presented to Augustine’s astonished eyes, she was approaching so noiselessly that she caught a glance from those of the enchantress. This look seemed to say to some one whom Augustine did not at first perceive, “Stay; you will see a pretty woman, and make her visit seem less of a bore.”

On seeing Augustine, the Duchess rose and made her sit down by her.

“And to what do I owe the pleasure of this visit, madame?” she said with a most gracious smile.

“Why all the falseness?” thought Augustine, replying only with a bow.

Her silence was compulsory. The young woman saw before her a superfluous witness of the scene. This personage was, of all the Colonels in the army, the youngest, the most fashionable, and the finest man. His face, full of life and youth, but already expressive, was further enhanced by a small moustache twirled up into points, and as black as jet, by a full imperial, by whiskers carefully combed, and a forest of black hair in some disorder. He was whisking a riding whip with an air of ease and freedom which suited his self-satisfied expression and the elegance of his dress; the ribbons attached to his button-hole were carelessly tied, and he seemed to pride himself much more on his smart appearance than on his courage. Augustine looked at the Duchesse de Carigliano, and indicated the Colonel by a sidelong glance. All its mute appeal was understood.

“Good-bye, then, Monsieur d’Aiglemont, we shall meet in the Bois de Boulogne.”

These words were spoken by the siren as though they were the result of an agreement made before Augustine’s arrival, and she winged them with a threatening look that the officer deserved perhaps for the admiration he showed in gazing at the modest flower, which contrasted so well with the haughty Duchess. The young fop bowed in silence, turned on the heels of his boots, and gracefully quitted the boudoir. At this instant, Augustine, watching her rival, whose eyes seemed to follow the brilliant officer, detected in that glance a sentiment of which the transient expression is known to every woman. She perceived with the deepest anguish that her visit would be useless; this lady, full of artifice, was too greedy of homage not to have a ruthless heart.

“Madame,” said Augustine in a broken voice, “the step I am about to take will seem to you very strange; but there is a madness of despair which ought to excuse anything. I understand only too well why Theodore prefers your house to any other, and why your mind has so much power over his. Alas! I have only to look into myself to find more than ample reasons. But I am devoted to my husband, madame. Two years of tears have not effaced his image from my heart, though I have lost his. In my folly I dared to dream of a contest with you; and I have come to you to ask you by what means I may triumph over yourself. Oh, madame,” cried the young wife, ardently seizing the hand which her rival allowed her to hold, “I will never pray to God for my own happiness with so much fervor as I will beseech Him for yours, if you will help me to win back Sommervieux’s regard--I will not say his love. I have no hope but in you. Ah! tell me how you could please him, and make him forget the first days----” At these words Augustine broke down, suffocated with sobs she could not suppress. Ashamed of her weakness, she hid her face in her handkerchief, which she bathed with tears.

“What a child you are, my dear little beauty!” said the Duchess, carried away by the novelty of such a scene, and touched, in spite of herself, at receiving such homage from the most perfect virtue perhaps in Paris. She took the young wife’s handkerchief, and herself wiped the tears from her eyes, soothing her by a few monosyllables murmured with gracious compassion. After a moment’s silence the Duchess, grasping poor Augustine’s hands in both her own--hands that had a rare character of dignity and powerful beauty--said in a gentle and friendly voice: “My first warning is to advise you not to weep so bitterly; tears are disfiguring. We must learn to deal firmly with the sorrows that make us ill, for love does not linger long by a sick-bed. Melancholy, at first, no doubt, lends a certain attractive grace, but it ends by dragging the features and blighting the loveliest face. And besides, our tyrants are so vain as to insist that their slaves should be always cheerful.”

“But, madame, it is not in my power not to feel. How is it possible, without suffering a thousand deaths, to see the face which once beamed with love and gladness turn chill, colorless, and indifferent? I cannot control my heart!”

“So much the worse, sweet child. But I fancy I know all your story. In the first place, if your husband is unfaithful to you, understand clearly that I am not his accomplice. If I was anxious to have him in my drawing-room, it was, I own, out of vanity; he was famous, and he went nowhere. I like you too much already to tell you all the mad things he has done for my sake. I will only reveal one, because it may perhaps help us to bring him back to you, and to punish him for the audacity of his behavior to me. He will end by compromising me. I know the world too well, my dear, to abandon myself to the discretion of a too superior man. You should know that one may allow them to court one, but marry them--that is a mistake! We women ought to admire men of genius, and delight in them as a spectacle, but as to living with them? Never.--No, no. It is like wanting to find pleasure in inspecting the machinery of the opera instead of sitting in a box to enjoy its brilliant illusions. But this misfortune has fallen on you, my poor child, has it not? Well, then, you must try to arm yourself against tyranny.”

“Ah, madame, before coming in here, only seeing you as I came in, I already detected some arts of which I had no suspicion.”

“Well, come and see me sometimes, and it will not be long before you have mastered the knowledge of these trifles, important, too, in their way. Outward things are, to fools, half of life; and in that matter more than one clever man is a fool, in spite of all his talent. But I dare wager you never could refuse your Theodore anything!”

“How refuse anything, madame, if one loves a man?”

“Poor innocent, I could adore you for your simplicity. You should know that the more we love the less we should allow a man, above all, a husband, to see the whole extent of our passion. The one who loves most is tyrannized over, and, which is worse, is sooner or later neglected. The one who wishes to rule should----”

“What, madame, must I then dissimulate, calculate, become false, form an artificial character, and live in it? How is it possible to live in such a way? Can you----” she hesitated; the Duchess smiled.

“My dear child,” the great lady went on in a serious tone, “conjugal happiness has in all times been a speculation, a business demanding particular attention. If you persist in talking passion while I am talking marriage, we shall soon cease to understand each other. Listen to me,” she went on, assuming a confidential tone. “I have been in the way of seeing some of the superior men of our day. Those who have married have for the most part chosen quite insignificant wives. Well, those wives governed them, as the Emperor governs us; and if they were not loved, they were at least respected. I like secrets--especially those which concern women--well enough to have amused myself by seeking the clue to the riddle. Well, my sweet child, those worthy women had the gift of analyzing their husbands’ nature; instead of taking fright, like you, at their superiority, they very acutely noted the qualities they lacked, and either by possessing those qualities, or by feigning to possess them, they found means of making such a handsome display of them in their husbands’ eyes that in the end they impressed them. Also, I must tell you, all these souls which appear so lofty have just a speck of madness in them, which we ought to know how to take advantage of. By firmly resolving to have the upper hand and never deviating from that aim, by bringing all our actions to bear on it, all our ideas, our cajolery, we subjugate these eminently capricious natures, which, by the very mutability of their thoughts, lend us the means of influencing them.”

“Good heavens!” cried the young wife in dismay. “And this is life. It is a warfare----”

“In which we must always threaten,” said the Duchess, laughing. “Our power is wholly factitious. And we must never allow a man to despise us; it is impossible to recover from such a descent but by odious manoeuvring. Come,” she added, “I will give you a means of bringing your husband to his senses.”

She rose with a smile to guide the young and guileless apprentice to conjugal arts through the labyrinth of her palace. They came to a back-staircase, which led up to the reception rooms. As Madame de Carigliano pressed the secret springlock of the door she stopped, looking at Augustine with an inimitable gleam of shrewdness and grace. “The Duc de Carigliano adores me,” said she. “Well, he dare not enter by this door without my leave. And he is a man in the habit of commanding thousands of soldiers. He knows how to face a battery, but before me,--he is afraid!”

Augustine sighed. They entered a sumptuous gallery, where the painter’s wife was led by the Duchess up to the portrait painted by Theodore of Mademoiselle Guillaume. On seeing it, Augustine uttered a cry.

“I knew it was no longer in my house,” she said, “but--here!----”

“My dear child, I asked for it merely to see what pitch of idiocy a man of genius may attain to. Sooner or later I should have returned it to you, for I never expected the pleasure of seeing the original here face to face with the copy. While we finish our conversation I will have it carried down to your carriage. And if, armed with such a talisman, you are not your husband’s mistress for a hundred years, you are not a woman, and you deserve your fate.”

Augustine kissed the Duchess’ hand, and the lady clasped her to her heart, with all the more tenderness because she would forget her by the morrow. This scene might perhaps have destroyed for ever the candor and purity of a less virtuous woman than Augustine, for the astute politics of the higher social spheres were no more consonant to Augustine than the narrow reasoning of Joseph Lebas, or Madame Guillaume’s vapid morality. Strange are the results of the false positions into which we may be brought by the slightest mistake in the conduct of life! Augustine was like an Alpine cowherd surprised by an avalanche; if he hesitates, if he listens to the shouts of his comrades, he is almost certainly lost. In such a crisis the heart steels itself or breaks.

Madame de Sommervieux returned home a prey to such agitation as it is difficult to describe. Her conversation with the Duchesse de Carigliano had roused in her mind a crowd of contradictory thoughts. Like the sheep in the fable, full of courage in the wolf’s absence, she preached to herself, and laid down admirable plans of conduct; she devised a thousand coquettish stratagems; she even talked to her husband, finding, away from him, all the springs of true eloquence which never desert a woman; then, as she pictured to herself Theodore’s clear and steadfast gaze, she began to quake. When she asked whether monsieur were at home her voice shook. On learning that he would not be in to dinner, she felt an unaccountable thrill of joy. Like a criminal who has appealed against sentence of death, a respite, however short, seemed to her a lifetime. She placed the portrait in her room, and waited for her husband in all the agonies of hope. That this venture must decide her future life, she felt too keenly not to shiver at every sound, even the low ticking of the clock, which seemed to aggravate her terrors by doling them out to her. She tried to cheat time by various devices. The idea struck her of dressing in a way which would make her exactly like the portrait. Then, knowing her husband’s restless temper, she had her room lighted up with unusual brightness, feeling sure that when he came in curiosity would bring him there at once. Midnight had struck when, at the call of the groom, the street gate was opened, and the artist’s carriage rumbled in over the stones of the silent courtyard.

“What is the meaning of this illumination?” asked Theodore in glad tones, as he came into her room.

Augustine skilfully seized the auspicious moment; she threw herself into her husband’s arms, and pointed to the portrait. The artist stood rigid as a rock, and his eyes turned alternately on Augustine, on the accusing dress. The frightened wife, half-dead, as she watched her husband’s changeful brow--that terrible brow--saw the expressive furrows gathering like clouds; then she felt her blood curdling in her veins when, with a glaring look, and in a deep hollow voice, he began to question her:

“Where did you find that picture?”

“The Duchess de Carigliano returned it to me.”

“You asked her for it?”

“I did not know that she had it.”

The gentleness, or rather the exquisite sweetness of this angel’s voice, might have touched a cannibal, but not an artist in the clutches of wounded vanity.

“It is worthy of her!” exclaimed the painter in a voice of thunder. “I will be avenged!” he cried, striding up and down the room. “She shall die of shame; I will paint her! Yes, I will paint her as Messalina stealing out at night from the palace of Claudius.”

“Theodore!” said a faint voice.

“I will kill her!”

“My dear----”

“She is in love with that little cavalry colonel, because he rides well----”

“Theodore!”

“Let me be!” said the painter in a tone almost like a roar.

It would be odious to describe the whole scene. In the end the frenzy of passion prompted the artist to acts and words which any woman not so young as Augustine would have ascribed to madness.

At eight o’clock next morning Madame Guillaume, surprising her daughter, found her pale, with red eyes, her hair in disorder, holding a handkerchief soaked with tears, while she gazed at the floor strewn with the torn fragments of a dress and the broken fragments of a large gilt picture-frame. Augustine, almost senseless with grief, pointed to the wreck with a gesture of deep despair.

“I don’t know that the loss is very great!” cried the old mistress of the Cat and Racket. “It was like you, no doubt; but I am told that there is a man on the boulevard who paints lovely portraits for fifty crowns.”

“Oh, mother!”

“Poor child, you are quite right,” replied Madame Guillaume, who misinterpreted the expression of her daughter’s glance at her. “True, my child, no one ever can love you as fondly as a mother. My darling, I guess it all; but confide your sorrows to me, and I will comfort you. Did I not tell you long ago that the man was mad! Your maid has told me pretty stories. Why, he must be a perfect monster!”

Augustine laid a finger on her white lips, as if to implore a moment’s silence. During this dreadful night misery had led her to that patient resignation which in mothers and loving wives transcends in its effects all human energy, and perhaps reveals in the heart of women the existence of certain chords which God has withheld from men.

An inscription engraved on a broken column in the cemetery at Montmartre states that Madame de Sommervieux died at the age of twenty-seven. In the simple words of this epitaph one of the timid creature’s friends can read the last scene of a tragedy. Every year, on the second of November, the solemn day of the dead, he never passes this youthful monument without wondering whether it does not need a stronger woman than Augustine to endure the violent embrace of genius?

“The humble and modest flowers that bloom in the valley,” he reflects, “perish perhaps when they are transplanted too near the skies, to the region where storms gather and the sun is scorching.”



ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Aiglemont, General, Marquis Victor d’
       The Firm of Nucingen
       A Woman of Thirty

     Birotteau, Cesar
       Cesar Birotteau
       A Bachelor’s Establishment

     Camusot
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Cousin Pons
       The Muse of the Department
       Cesar Birotteau

     Cardot, Jean-Jerome-Severin
       A Start in Life
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Cesar Birotteau

     Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de
       Father Goriot
       Sarrasine

     Carigliano, Duchesse de
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Peasantry
       The Member for Arcis

     Guillaume
       Cesar Birotteau

     Lebas, Joseph
       Cesar Birotteau
       Cousin Betty

     Lebas, Madame Joseph (Virginie)
       Cesar Birotteau
       Cousin Betty

     Lourdois
       Cesar Birotteau

     Rabourdin, Xavier
       The Government Clerks
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Middle Classes

     Roguin, Madame
       Cesar Birotteau
       Pierrette
       A Second Home
       A Daughter of Eve

     Sommervieux, Theodore de
       The Government Clerks
       Modeste Mignon

     Sommervieux, Madame Theodore de (Augustine)
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket
       Cesar Birotteau
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################