“Ah! madame,” replied the doctor, “I have appalling stories, but each has its hour—you know Chamfort’s jest to the Duc de Fronsac: ‘Between your sally and the present moment lie ten bottles of champagne.’”

“But it is two in the morning, and the story of Rosina has prepared us,” said the mistress.

“Tell us, Monsieur Bianchon!” they cried.

The doctor bowed and fell silent.

“At about a hundred paces from Vendôme, on the banks of the Loir,” he began, “stands an old brown house with very high roofs, so isolated that nothing stands near it, not even a tannery or tavern. In front is a garden running down to the river where once-clipped box shrubs now straggle. Willows rooted in the stream form a half-hidden fence. Weeds have taken the bank; fruit trees, neglected for ten years, no longer bear, their suckers forming a thicket. Espaliers look like a copse; the gravel walks are overgrown—there is no trace of a path.

“From the hilltop where the ruins of the old Dukes of Vendôme cling, you can see this must once have been a country gentleman’s delight, devoted to horticulture, especially choice fruit. An arbor’s wreck and a partly standing table remain. The garden suggests provincial peace, like an epitaph for a worthy tradesman. One wall bears a sundial with the motto, ‘Ultimam cogita.’

“The roof is dreadfully dilapidated; the shutters are always closed; swallows hang nests from the balconies; the doors are shut. Grasses green the flagstones; the ironwork is rusty. Moon and sun, winter and snow have eaten into the wood, warped the boards, peeled paint. The silence is broken only by birds, cats, polecats, rats and mice. An invisible hand has written over it all: ‘Mystery.’

“From the street you see a large arched gate full of holes made by children. I later learned the door had been blocked for ten years. Through these breaches the courtyard side is as ruined as the garden: weeds on paving-stones; walls cracked; blackened coping laced with pellitory. Steps are disjointed; the bell-cord rotten; the gutter-spouts broken. What fire from heaven or what curse has fallen on this dwelling? Reptiles crawl over it but reply not. This empty house is a vast enigma.

“It was once a small domain, held in fief, called La Grande Bretèche. During my stay at Vendôme, where Despleins had left me to tend a rich patient, this strange dwelling became one of my keenest pleasures. It was better than a ruin; ruins keep memories, but this house, decaying though still roofed, held a secret, an unrevealed thought. More than once I climbed the wild hedge, braved scratches to enter the ownerless garden, and lingered for hours amid its disorder. I would not have traded the story that produced this scene for any gossip. There I wove romances and indulged a melancholy that intoxicated me. Had I known the reason for the neglect, I would have lost the unwritten poetry that enchanted me. To me the place represented phases of human life shadowed by misfortune: sometimes a graveyard without the dead, sometimes a leper’s house, sometimes a home like the Atridae; above all the contemplative provincial life. I often wept there; I never laughed.

“Sometimes the dull hum of a passing wood-pigeon gave me involuntary terrors. The earth is dank; you must watch for lizards, vipers, frogs; above all you must not fear cold, for an icy cloak can settle on your shoulders like the Commendatore’s hand on Don Giovanni’s neck.

“One evening the wind turned an old rusty weathercock and its creak sounded like a cry from the house. I returned to my inn absorbed in gloomy thoughts. After supper the hostess entered with an air of mystery: ‘Monsieur, here is Monsieur Regnault.’

“‘Who is Monsieur Regnault?’ I asked.

“‘What, sir, do you not know Monsieur Regnault?—Well, that’s odd,’ she said and left.

“A tall, slim man in black appeared, hat in hand, entering with a receding forehead, a small pointed head, and a colorless face like dirty water. You would have taken him for an usher. His coat was old and worn, but he had a diamond in his shirt frill and gold rings in his ears.

“‘Monsieur,’ I said. He sat by my fire, placed his hat on my table and, rubbing his hands, said: ‘Dear me, it is very cold.—Monsieur, I am Monsieur Regnault.’

“I encouraged myself to question.

“‘I am,’ he continued, ‘notary at Vendôme.’

“‘Delighted, monsieur,’ I said. ‘But I am not in a position to make a will for reasons best known to myself.’

“‘One moment!’ he said, raising a hand. ‘Allow me, monsieur! I am informed you sometimes walk in the garden of La Grande Bretèche.’

“‘Yes, monsieur.’

“‘One moment!’ he repeated. ‘That constitutes a misdemeanor. As executor under the will of the late Comtesse de Merret, I beg you to discontinue the practice. I am not a Turk and do not wish to make a crime of it. Besides, you may be ignorant of the circumstances which compel me to leave the finest mansion in Vendôme to fall into ruin. You must be a man of education and know the laws forbid trespass on enclosed property. A hedge is the same as a wall. But the state in which the place is left may excuse your curiosity. For my part, I should be content to allow you to come and go; but being bound to respect the testatrix’s will, I beg you not to enter the garden. I myself, since the will was read, have never set foot in the house, which is part of the late Madame de Merret’s estate. We have done nothing there but verify doors and windows to calculate taxes I must pay annually from the funds she left. Ah! my dear sir, her will made a great commotion in town.’

“He paused to blow his nose. I respected his volubility—administering Madame de Merret’s estate had been the most important event of his life. Forced to leave my reveries I asked the reasons for such eccentricity.

“At these words pleasure spread across the lawyer’s countenance. He drew up his collar, took his snuffbox, offered me a pinch; when I declined, he took a large one and was happy. A man without a hobby does not know life’s pleasures.

“‘Monsieur,’ said Regnault, ‘I was head-clerk in Monsieur Roguin’s office in Paris. A first-rate house—you may have heard of it? No! An unfortunate bankruptcy made it famous. Not having money to purchase a practice in Paris at the inflated prices of 1816, I came here and bought my predecessor’s business. I had relations in Vendôme; a wealthy aunt allowed me to marry her daughter. Three months after being licensed by the Keeper of the Seals, one evening, before my marriage, I was sent for by Madame la Comtesse de Merret to her Chateau of Merret. Her maid, now a servant in this inn, was waiting at my door with the Countess’ own carriage. Ah! one moment! I ought to tell you Monsieur le Comte de Merret had gone to Paris to die two months before I came here. He came to a miserable end, plunging into every dissipation. You understand?

“‘On the day he left, Madame la Comtesse had quitted La Grande Bretèche, having dismantled it. Some say she burnt the furniture and hangings—in short, everything used to furnish the premises now let by the said M.—(Dear, what am I saying? I beg your pardon, I thought I was dictating a lease.)—In short, they say she burnt everything in the meadow at Merret. Have you been to Merret, monsieur?—No,’ he answered himself, ‘Ah, it is a very fine place.’

“‘For about three months before, the Count and Countess lived very eccentrically; they admitted no visitors; Madame stayed on the ground floor, Monsieur on the first. When the Countess was left alone she appeared only at church. At home she refused to see friends. She was already much altered when she left La Grande Bretèche for Merret. That dear lady—I say dear, for she gave me this diamond, though I saw her but once—was very ill; she had, no doubt, given up hope, for she died without choosing to send for a doctor; many fancied she was not quite right in her head. Well, sir, my curiosity was excited when I heard she needed my services. Nor was I the only one interested. That very night all the town knew I was going to Merret.

“‘The waiting-woman replied vaguely; nevertheless she told me her mistress had received the Sacrament that day and seemed unlikely to live through the night. It was about eleven when I reached the chateau. I went up the great staircase. After crossing large, lofty, dark rooms, diabolically cold and damp, I reached the state bedroom where the Countess lay. From the rumors about this lady (monsieur, I should never end if I repeated them), I had imagined a coquette. Imagine, then, that I had great difficulty seeing her in the great bed where she lay. To light this enormous, old-fashioned room thick with dust, she had only an old Argand lamp. Ah! you have not been to Merret. The bed is of the old world, with a high tester hung with flowered chintz. A small table by the bed held an ‘Imitation of Christ,’ which, by the way, I bought for my wife, and the lamp. There was also a deep armchair for her maid and two small chairs. There was no fire. That was all the furniture, scarcely enough to fill ten lines in an inventory.

“‘My dear sir, if you had seen that vast room, papered and hung with brown, you would have felt transported into a romance. It was icy—nay, funereal,’ and he lifted his hand theatrically.

“‘At last I saw Madame de Merret under the lamp’s glimmer. Her face was as yellow as wax and as narrow as two folded hands. She wore a lace cap showing abundant hair, white as linen thread. She sat up, keeping upright with difficulty. Her large black eyes, dimmed by fever and half-dead, hardly moved beneath the bony arch of her eyebrows—there,’ he added, pointing to his brow. ‘Her forehead was clammy; her fleshless hands were like bones covered with soft skin; veins and muscles perfectly visible. She must have been very handsome; now disease had made her a phantom. Her pale-violet lips barely moved when she spoke.

“‘Though my profession has brought me to many deaths to record last wishes, the families in tears and agonies I have seen were as nothing compared with this lonely woman in her vast chateau. I heard no sound; I perceived not the breathing that ought to move the sheets, and I stood motionless, absorbed. In fancy I am there still. At last her large eyes moved; she tried to raise her right hand, but it fell back, and she uttered words like a breath, for her voice was no longer a voice: “I have waited for you with the greatest impatience.” A bright flush rose to her cheeks. It was a great effort to speak.

“‘“Madame,” I began.’ She signed to me to be silent. The old housekeeper rose and whispered, “Do not speak; Madame la Comtesse is not in a state to bear the slightest noise.”

“‘I sat down. A few moments later, Madame de Merret mustered all her strength, slipped her right hand under the bolster, paused, and with a last effort withdrew a sealed paper, drops of perspiration on her brow. “I place my will in your hands—Oh! God! Oh!” and that was all. She clutched a crucifix, lifted it to her lips, and died.

“‘The expression of her eyes makes me shudder. She must have suffered much! Joy was in her last glance and remained stamped on her dead eyes.

“‘I brought away the will, and when opened found she had appointed me her executor. She left most of her property to the hospital at Vendôme except a few legacies. But these were her instructions regarding La Grande Bretèche: she ordered me to leave the place, for fifty years from her death, in the state it was at her death, forbidding anyone, whoever he might be, to enter the apartments, prohibiting any repairs whatever, and even settling a salary to pay watchmen if necessary to secure fulfillment. At the expiration of that term, if the will has been duly carried out, the house becomes my heirs’ property, for, as you know, a notary cannot take a bequest. Otherwise La Grande Bretèche reverts to the heirs-at-law, but on condition of fulfilling certain terms set forth in a codicil not to be opened until the fifty years expire. The will has not been disputed, so—’ Without finishing his sentence the lanky notary looked at me with triumph; I made him happy by offering congratulations.

“‘Monsieur,’ I said, ‘you have so vividly impressed me I fancy I see the dying woman whiter than her sheets; her glittering eyes frighten me; I shall dream of her tonight.—But you must have formed some idea as to the instructions contained in that extraordinary will.’

“‘Monsieur,’ said he with comical reticence, ‘I never allow myself to criticize the conduct of a person who honors me with the gift of a diamond.’

“Nevertheless I soon loosened the discreet notary’s tongue, though his digressions and the town’s conflicting gossip nearly put me to sleep. Happily he went away.

“‘Ah, ha, monsieur,’ he called on the stairs, ‘a good many persons would be glad to live five-and-forty years longer; but—one moment!’ and he laid his finger to his nostril with a cunning look, as much as to say, ‘Mark my words!—To last as long as that—you must not be past sixty now.’

“I closed my door, roused by this last speech which he thought funny; then I sat down with my feet on the fire-dogs. I had lost myself in a Radcliffean romance built on Monsieur Regnault’s legal base, when my landlady pushed the door open. She was a buxom, florid Fleming, always good-humored, a woman who had missed her calling.

“‘Well, monsieur,’ she asked, ‘Monsieur Regnault has no doubt been giving you his history of La Grande Bretèche?’

“‘Yes, Madame Lepas.’

“‘And what did he tell you?’

“I recounted the creepy story of Madame de Merret. At each sentence my hostess leaned forward with the scrutiny of an innkeeper, constable and merchant combined.

“‘My good Madame Lepas,’ I said, ‘you seem to know more about it. If not, why have you come up to me?’

“‘On my word, as an honest woman——’

“‘Do not swear; your eyes are big with a secret. You knew Monsieur de Merret; what sort of man was he?’

“‘Monsieur de Merret—well, you see he was a man you never could see the top of, he was so tall! A very good gentleman from Picardy, who had, as we say, his head close to his cap. He paid everything down to avoid difficulties. He was hot-tempered, you see! All our ladies liked him very much.’

“‘Because he was hot-tempered?’ I asked.

“‘Well, maybe,’ she said; ‘and you may suppose a man had to have something to show before marrying Madame de Merret, who, without reflection on others, was the handsomest and richest heiress in our parts. She had about twenty thousand francs a year. All the town was at the wedding; the bride was pretty and sweet-looking, quite a gem. Oh, they were a handsome couple in their day!’

“‘And were they happy together?’

“‘Hm, hm! so-so—so far as can be guessed, for, as you may suppose, we of the common sort were not hail-fellow-well-met with them.—Madame de Merret was a kind woman and very pleasant, who had no doubt sometimes to put up with her husband’s tantrums. But though he was rather haughty, we were fond of him. After all, it was his place to behave so. When a man is a born nobleman, you see——’

“‘Still, there must have been some catastrophe for them to part so violently?’

“‘I did not say there was any catastrophe, sir. I know nothing about it.’

“‘Indeed. Well, now, I am sure you know everything.’

“‘Well, sir, I will tell you the whole story.—When the Emperor sent Spaniards here, prisoners of war and others, I was required to lodge at the Government’s charge a young Spaniard sent to Vendôme on parole. Notwithstanding his parole, he had to show himself every day to the sub-prefect. He was a Spanish grandee—a name in os and dia, something like Bagos de Férédia. I wrote his name in my books; you may see it if you like. Ah! he was a handsome young fellow for a Spaniard, who are all ugly they say. He was not more than five feet two or three in height, but so well made; and he had little hands that he kept so beautifully! Ah! you should have seen them. He had as many brushes for his hands as a woman has for her toilet. He had thick, black hair, a flame in his eye, a somewhat coppery complexion, which I admired. He wore the finest linen I have ever seen, though I have had princesses to lodge here, among them General Bertrand, the Duc and Duchesse d’Abrantes, Monsieur Descazes, and the King of Spain. He did not eat much, but he had such polite and amiable ways that it was impossible to dislike him, though he scarcely spoke; if spoken to, he often did not answer—a way, a mania perhaps they have.

“‘He read his breviary like a priest and went to mass regularly. And where did he post himself?—we found this out later.—Within two yards of Madame de Merret’s chapel. As he took that place the first time, no one imagined purpose. Besides, he never raised his nose above his book, poor young man! And then, monsieur, of an evening he went for a walk on the hill among the ruins of the old castle. It was his only amusement, poor man; it reminded him of his native land. They say that Spain is all hills!’
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
One evening, shortly after he arrived, he stayed out late. I was uneasy when he didn’t return until midnight, but we were used to his whims; he took the key and we didn’t wait for him. He lived in a house we owned on Rue des Casernes. One of our stable-boys thought he had seen the Spanish Grandee swimming in the river. When he returned, I warned him about the weeds, and he seemed annoyed at being observed.

Eventually, one morning, we found he hadn’t come back. Searching his things, I discovered a note in his drawer, with fifty doubloons—about five thousand francs—and a sealed box of diamonds worth ten thousand francs. The note said that if he did not return, he left the money and diamonds to fund masses in gratitude for his escape.

At that time my husband went searching for him. He returned with the Spaniard’s clothes, found under a stone on a breakwater near la Grande Bretèche. He went early, so no one saw him. After reading the letter, he burned the clothes and, following Count Férédia’s wishes, we announced that he had escaped.

The sub-prefect sent the constabulary after him, but he was never caught. Lepas believed the Spaniard had drowned. I thought otherwise, suspecting his involvement in what happened with Madame de Merret, especially since Rosalie told me the crucifix her mistress cherished and was buried with was of ebony and silver; early in his stay Monsieur Férédia had a similar crucifix which I never saw again. Now, monsieur, do you think I should feel remorse about the Spaniard’s fifteen thousand francs? Aren’t they truly mine?

“Certainly. But have you ever questioned Rosalie?” I asked.

“Oh, I have, sir. But what can be done? That girl is like a wall. She knows something, but it’s impossible to make her talk.”

After a brief chat, my hostess left me with vague, sinister thoughts, romantic curiosity, and a religious dread—as if entering a dark church where a faint light glimmers beneath a high vault. La Grande Bretèche, with its overgrown grass, shuttered windows, rusty ironwork, and deserted rooms, suddenly appeared vividly in my mind. I felt compelled to explore the mysterious dwelling to uncover the heart of this solemn story, this drama that had claimed three lives.

Rosalie became the most intriguing person in Vendôme to me. Observing her, I sensed an inner thought beneath her blooming health. There was an element of sorrow or hope in her soul; her demeanor suggested a secret, like devout souls who pray excessively or a woman haunted by a past crime. Yet she was simple and clumsy, her vacant smile devoid of criminality; one would deem her innocent seeing the large checked kerchief tucked into her lilac-and-white-striped gown. “No,” I resolved, “I will not leave Vendôme without knowing the full story of la Grande Bretèche. To achieve this, I will make advances toward Rosalie if necessary.”

“Rosalie!” I called one evening.

“Your servant, sir?”

“You’re not married?” She flinched slightly.

“Oh! There’s no shortage of men if I ever fancy being miserable!” she laughed, quickly regaining composure; every woman, from the highest lady to the inn-servant, possesses presence of mind.

“Yes; you’re attractive enough to never lack suitors! But tell me, Rosalie, why did you become an inn-servant after leaving Madame de Merret? Didn’t she leave you a small annuity?”

“Oh yes, sir. But my position here is the best in all Vendôme.”

This reply seemed evasive. Rosalie appeared central to the affair; she seemed tied to its core. It wasn’t a matter for ordinary courtship; this girl contained the final chapter of a romance, and from that moment all my attention was directed toward her. By studying her, I noticed admirable qualities; she was clean, neat, and undeniably attractive, soon embodying every charm desire can bestow upon a woman. A fortnight after the notary’s visit, one early morning, I said to Rosalie:

“Come, tell me all you know about Madame de Merret.”

“Oh!” she replied, “I will tell you, but keep it a secret.”

“Of course, my child; I will guard your secrets with a thief’s honor, the most loyal known.”

“If it’s all the same to you,” she said, “I’d prefer it be with your own.”

She adjusted her head-kerchief and settled in to tell the tale; a particular attitude of confidence is necessary for storytelling. The best tales are told at a certain hour—just as we are all here at table.

If I were to reproduce Rosalie’s diffuse eloquence, a whole volume would scarcely suffice. As the event she recounted stands between the notary’s gossip and Madame Lepas’s account, I will summarize it concisely.

The room at la Grande Bretèche where Madame de Merret slept was on the ground floor; a small built-in cupboard about four feet deep served as her wardrobe. Three months before the evening in question, Madame de Merret had been seriously ill, so much so that her husband had taken to sleeping on the first floor. By chance, he returned home two hours later than usual from the club, where he had been reading the papers and discussing politics. His wife assumed he was in bed and asleep. The evening’s animated discussions and his losses at billiards had delayed him.

For some time Monsieur de Merret had relied on Rosalie to inform him if his wife was in bed; her affirmative responses led him to his room, trusting her completely. But that evening he decided to check on Madame de Merret to share his misfortunes and perhaps seek comfort. He had noticed her looking particularly lovely at dinner and thought her convalescence had enhanced her beauty, a realization that often comes too late for husbands.

Upon entering, he thought he heard the closet door shut, but when he entered, Madame de Merret stood alone by the fireplace. His instincts were piqued by a nagging doubt; he noticed an anxious expression in her eyes.

“You’re very late,” she said, her voice slightly husky.

Monsieur de Merret remained silent as Rosalie entered, which startled him. He began pacing the room, arms crossed.

“Have you received bad news, or are you unwell?” his wife asked timidly while Rosalie helped her undress. He didn’t respond.

“You can go, Rosalie,” Madame de Merret said; “I can manage my curl-papers myself.” She sensed disaster in her husband’s demeanor and wanted to be alone with him. Once Rosalie left, or was thought to have left, for she lingered in the passage, Monsieur de Merret confronted his wife, stating coldly, “Madame, there’s someone in your cupboard!” She calmly replied, “No, monsieur.”

This “No” pierced Monsieur de Merret’s heart; he didn’t believe it, yet his wife appeared more saintly than ever. He moved to open the closet door, but Madame de Merret took his hand, stopping him, and said with strange emotion, “Remember, if you find no one there, everything must end between us.”

The extraordinary dignity of her stance filled him with deep respect and inspired a resolve that could be legendary on a grander stage.

“No, Josephine,” he said, “I won’t open it. Regardless of the outcome, we would be forever parted. I know your soul’s purity; you wouldn’t commit a deadly sin to save your life.” At these words, Madame de Merret looked at him with a haggard expression. “Here is your crucifix,” he continued. “Swear to me before God that there’s no one in there; I will believe you—I will never open that door.”

Madame de Merret took the crucifix and swore, “I swear it.”

“Louder,” he insisted; “repeat: ‘I swear before God that there is nobody in that closet.’” She repeated the words without flinching.

“That will do,” said Monsieur de Merret coldly. After a moment, he remarked, “You have a fine piece of work there, which I’ve never seen before,” examining the ebony and silver crucifix.

“I found it at Duvivier’s; last year, when that troop of Spanish prisoners passed through Vendôme, he bought it from a Spanish monk.”

“Indeed,” said Monsieur de Merret, hanging the crucifix back on its nail, and he rang for Rosalie.

He waited for her to arrive. “Go to bed, all of you,” he instructed, beckoning Jean, his coachman and confidential servant, to come close. He whispered, “When they’re all asleep—mind, asleep—you understand?—come down and tell me.”

Monsieur de Merret kept his gaze on his wife while giving orders, returning to her at the fireside to discuss the billiards game and the club’s discussions. When Rosalie returned, she found them conversing amiably.

Not long before, Monsieur de Merret had had new ceilings installed in all the reception rooms on the ground floor. Plaster was scarce in Vendôme, and he had ordered a considerable quantity, knowing he could sell any excess. This circumstance inspired his plan.

“Gorenflot is here, sir,” Rosalie whispered.

“Tell him to come in,” he replied aloud.

Madame de Merret paled at the sight of the mason.

“Gorenflot,” said her husband, “go fetch some bricks from the coach-house; bring enough to wall up the cupboard door; you can use the leftover plaster as cement.” Then, pulling Rosalie and the mason close, he whispered, “Listen, Gorenflot, you’ll sleep here tonight; tomorrow morning, I’ll provide you a passport to take you abroad to a place I’ll specify. I’ll give you six thousand francs for your journey. You must live in that town for ten years; if you don’t like it, you may settle elsewhere, but it must be in the same country. Go through Paris and wait there until I join you. I’ll give you an agreement for six thousand francs more, to be paid upon your return, provided you fulfill the conditions of the bargain. In return, you must keep silent about what you do tonight. Rosalie, I’ll secure ten thousand francs for you, which won’t be paid until your wedding day, contingent on your marrying Gorenflot; but to marry, you must remain silent. If not, no wedding gift!”

“Rosalie,” Madame de Merret said, “come and brush my hair.”

Her husband quietly paced the room, keeping an eye on the door, the mason, and his wife, without displaying any suspicion. Gorenflot made some noise. Madame de Merret seized a moment when he was unloading bricks to say to Rosalie: “My dear child, I’ll give you a thousand francs a year if you tell Gorenflot to leave a crack at the bottom.” Then she added casually, “You’d better help him.”

Monsieur and Madame de Merret remained silent while Gorenflot walled up the door. This silence was intentional on the husband’s part; he didn’t want to give his wife the chance to say anything ambiguous. On Madame de Merret’s side, it was either pride or prudence. When the wall was half built, the cunning mason took advantage of his master’s back being turned to break one of the two panes in the top of the door with his pick. Madame de Merret understood that Rosalie had spoken to Gorenflot. They all three then saw the face of a dark, gloomy-looking man with black hair and fiery eyes.

Before her husband turned around, the poor woman nodded to the stranger, signaling “Hope.”

At four o’clock, as dawn broke in September, the work was completed. The mason was placed in charge of Jean, and Monsieur de Merret slept in his wife’s room.

The next morning, he casually mentioned, “Oh, by the way, I must go to the Maire for the passport.” He donned his hat, took a few steps toward the door, paused, and grabbed the crucifix. His wife trembled with joy.

“He will go to Duvivier’s,” she thought.

As soon as he left, Madame de Merret rang for Rosalie and cried in a terrible voice, “The pick! Bring the pick! We must work. I saw how Gorenflot did it yesterday; we have time to make a gap and build it up again.”

In an instant, Rosalie brought her mistress a cleaver; with an intensity beyond words, she began demolishing the wall. She had removed a few bricks when, turning to deliver a stronger blow, she saw Monsieur de Merret behind her. She fainted.

“Lay madame on her bed,” he said coldly.

Foreseeing what would happen in his absence, he had set this trap for his wife; he had merely written to the Maire and summoned Duvivier. The jeweler arrived just as the disorder in the room was being repaired.

“Duvivier,” Monsieur de Merret asked, “didn’t you buy any crucifixes from the Spaniards who passed through town?”

“No, monsieur.”

“Very well; thank you,” he said, casting a fierce glare at his wife. “Jean,” he added, turning to his valet, “you can serve my meals here in Madame de Merret’s room. She is ill, and I won’t leave her until she recovers.”

The cruel man remained in his wife’s room for twenty days. During the early days, when there was some noise in the closet and Josephine wanted to intercede for the dying man, he said without allowing her to speak, “You swore on the Cross that there was no one there.”

After this story, all the ladies rose from the table, breaking the spell Bianchon had cast over them. Some among them had shivered at the last words.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################