One of the few drawing-rooms where, under the Restoration, the Archbishop of Besancon was sometimes seen was that of the Baronne de Watteville; he was particularly attached to her for her religious sentiments.

A word about this lady, the most important of Besancon.

Monsieur de Watteville, a descendant of the notorious Watteville—famous for violent adventures—was, in this nineteenth-century version, as gentle and peaceable as his ancestor had been passionate and turbulent. After living in the Comte like a wood-louse in a wainscot crack, he married the heiress of the celebrated house of Rupt. Mademoiselle de Rupt brought twenty thousand francs a year to augment the Baron de Watteville’s ten thousand francs in real estate. The Swiss gentleman’s coat-of-arms was borne as an escutcheon of pretence on the old shield of the Rupts. The marriage, arranged in 1802, was solemnized in 1815 after the second Restoration. Within three years of their daughter’s birth all her grandparents had died and their estates wound up. They sold the Baron’s house and settled in the Rue de la Prefecture in the fine old mansion of the Rupts, with an immense garden stretching to the Rue du Perron. Devout from youth, Madame de Watteville grew more so after marriage, prominent in the saintly brotherhood that gives Besancon’s upper circles a solemn, prudish air.

Monsieur le Baron de Watteville, a dry, lean man of little intelligence, looked worn in an inexplicable way—he enjoyed profound ignorance. His red-haired, stern wife became proverbial (we still say “as sharp as Madame de Watteville”), and some legal wits hinted he had been worn against that rock—Rupt, obviously derived from rupes. Rosalie was the only offspring of the union between the Wattevilles and the Rupts.

Monsieur de Watteville spent his existence in a handsome workshop with a lathe; he was a turner and also collected. Doctors who study madness regard collecting small things as a first degree of mental aberration. The Baron treasured shells and geological fragments from around Besancon. Some, especially women, would say, “He has a noble soul! He perceived from the first days of married life that he would never be his wife’s master, so he threw himself into a mechanical occupation and good living.”

The house of the Rupts still bore Louis XIV magnificence and traces of both families’ nobility. The cut-glass chandeliers, brocades, damasks, carpets, and gilt furniture harmonized with old liveries and servants. Served on blackened family plate around a mirror tray with Dresden china, the food was exquisite. The wines selected by Monsieur de Watteville—who, to occupy his time and vary his employments, acted as his own butler—enjoyed local fame. Madame de Watteville’s fortune was considerable; her husband’s only estate, Rouxey, yielded about ten thousand francs a year. Because of Madame de Watteville’s intimacy with the Archbishop, several clever Abbes of the diocese, not averse to good feeding, were at home there.

At a ceremonial dinner early in September 1834—women standing in a circle round the drawing-room fire and men in groups by the windows—everyone brightened at the announcement of Monsieur l’Abbe de Grancey’s entrance.

“Well, and the lawsuit?” they all cried.

“Won!” replied the Vicar-General. “The verdict of the Court, from which we had no hope—”

This alluded to the First Court of Appeal of 1830, from which the Legitimists had largely withdrawn.

“The verdict is in our favor on every point, and reverses the decision of the Lower Court.”

“Everybody thought you were done for.”

“And we should have been, but for me. I told our advocate to be off to Paris, and at the crucial moment I secured a new pleader, to whom we owe our victory, a wonderful man—”

“At Besancon?” said Monsieur de Watteville, guilelessly.

“At Besancon,” replied the Abbe de Grancey.

“Oh yes, Savaron,” said a handsome young man sitting near the Baroness, named de Soulas.

“He spent five or six nights over it; he devoured documents and briefs; he had seven or eight interviews of several hours with me,” continued Monsieur de Grancey, who had just reappeared at the Hotel de Rupt. “In short, Monsieur Savaron has completely beaten the celebrated lawyer our adversaries had sent from Paris. This young man is wonderful, the bigwigs say. Thus the chapter is twice victorious: it has triumphed in law and also in politics, since it has vanquished Liberalism in the person of the Counsel of our Municipality. ‘Our adversaries,’ our advocate said, ‘must not expect readiness on all sides to ruin the Archbishoprics.’ The President was obliged to enforce silence. All the townsfolk of Besancon applauded. Thus the possession of the buildings of the old convent remains with the Chapter of the Cathedral of Besancon. Monsieur Savaron, however, invited his Parisian opponent to dine with him after the court. He accepted, saying, ‘Honor to every conqueror,’ and complimented him on his success without bitterness.”

“And where did you unearth this lawyer?” said Madame de Watteville. “I never heard his name before.”

“Why, you can see his windows from here,” replied the Vicar-General. “Monsieur Savaron lives in the Rue du Perron; the garden of his house adjoins yours.”

“But he is not a native of the Comte,” said Monsieur de Watteville.

“So little is he a native of any place, that no one knows where he comes from,” said Madame de Chavoncourt.

“But who is he?” asked Madame de Watteville, taking the Abbe’s arm to go into the dining-room. “If he is a stranger, by what chance has he settled at Besancon? It is a strange fancy for a barrister.”

“Very strange!” echoed Amedee de Soulas, whose biography is necessary to the understanding of this tale.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In all ages France and England have carried on an exchange of trifles, all the more constant as it evades the tyranny of the Custom-house. The fashion that is called English in Paris is called French in London, and this is reciprocal. The hostility of the two nations is suspended on two points--the uses of words and the fashions of dress. God Save the King, the national air of England, is a tune written by Lulli for the Chorus of Esther or of Athalie. Hoops, introduced at Paris by an Englishwoman, were invented in London, it is said, by a Frenchwoman, the notorious Duchess of Portsmouth. They were at first so jeered at that the first Englishwoman who appeared in them at the Tuileries narrowly escaped being crushed by the crowd; but they were adopted. This fashion tyrannized over the ladies of Europe for half a century. At the peace of 1815, for a year, the long waists of the English were a standing jest; all Paris went to see Pothier and Brunet in Les Anglaises pour rire; but in 1816 and 1817 the belt of the Frenchwoman, which in 1814 cut her across the bosom, gradually descended till it reached the hips.

Within ten years England made two little gifts to our language. The Incroyable, the Merveilleux, the Elegant, the three successes of the petit-maitre of discreditable etymology, have made way for the “dandy” and the “lion.” The lion is not the parent of the lionne. The lionne is due to the famous song by Alfred de Musset:

  Avez vous vu dans Barcelone
  .... C’est ma maitresse et ma lionne.

There has been a fusion—or, if you prefer it, a confusion—of the two words and the leading ideas. When an absurdity can amuse Paris, which devours as many masterpieces as absurdities, the provinces can hardly be deprived of it. So, as soon as the lion paraded Paris with his mane, his beard and moustaches, his waistcoats and his eyeglass, maintained in its place, without the help of his hands, by the contraction of his cheek, and eye-socket, the chief towns of some departments had their sub-lions, who protested by the smartness of their trouser-straps against the untidiness of their fellow-townsmen.

Thus, in 1834, Besancon could boast of a lion, in the person of Monsieur Amedee-Sylvain de Soulas, spelt Souleyas at the time of the Spanish occupation. Amedee de Soulas is perhaps the only man in Besancon descended from a Spanish family. Spain sent men to manage her business in the Comte, but very few Spaniards settled there. The Soulas remained in consequence of their connection with Cardinal Granvelle. Young Monsieur de Soulas was always talking of leaving Besancon, a dull town, church-going, and not literary, a military centre and garrison town, of which the manners and customs and physiognomy are worth describing. This opinion allowed of his lodging, like a man uncertain of the future, in three very scantily furnished rooms at the end of the Rue Neuve, just where it opens into the Rue de la Prefecture.

Young Monsieur de Soulas could not possibly live without a tiger. This tiger was the son of one of his farmers, a small servant aged fourteen, thick-set, and named Babylas. The lion dressed his tiger very smartly--a short tunic-coat of iron-gray cloth, belted with patent leather, bright blue plush breeches, a red waistcoat, polished leather top-boots, a shiny hat with black lacing, and brass buttons with the arms of Soulas. Amedee gave this boy white cotton gloves and his washing, and thirty-six francs a month to keep himself--a sum that seemed enormous to the grisettes of Besancon: four hundred and twenty francs a year to a child of fifteen, without counting extras! The extras consisted in the price for which he could sell his turned clothes, a present when Soulas exchanged one of his horses, and the perquisite of the manure. The two horses, treated with sordid economy, cost, one with another, eight hundred francs a year. His bills for articles received from Paris, such as perfumery, cravats, jewelry, patent blacking, and clothes, ran to another twelve hundred francs. Add to this the groom, or tiger, the horses, a very superior style of dress, and six hundred francs a year for rent, and you will see a grand total of three thousand francs.

Now, Monsieur de Soulas’ father had left him only four thousand francs a year, the income from some cottage farms which lent painful uncertainty to the rents. The lion had hardly three francs a day left for food, amusements, and gambling. He very often dined out, and breakfasted with remarkable frugality. When he was positively obliged to dine at his own cost, he sent his tiger to fetch a couple of dishes from a cookshop, never spending more than twenty-five sous.

Young Monsieur de Soulas was supposed to be a spendthrift, recklessly extravagant, whereas the poor man made the two ends meet in the year with a keenness and skill which would have done honor to a thrifty housewife. At Besancon in those days no one knew how great a tax on a man’s capital were six francs spent in polish to spread on his boots or shoes, yellow gloves at fifty sous a pair, cleaned in the deepest secrecy to make them three times renewed, cravats costing ten francs, and lasting three months, four waistcoats at twenty-five francs, and trousers fitting close to the boots. How could he do otherwise, since we see women in Paris bestowing their special attention on simpletons who visit them, and cut out the most remarkable men by means of these frivolous advantages, which a man can buy for fifteen louis, and get his hair curled and a fine linen shirt into the bargain?

If this unhappy youth should seem to you to have become a lion on very cheap terms, you must know that Amedee de Soulas had been three times to Switzerland, by coach and in short stages, twice to Paris, and once from Paris to England. He passed as a well-informed traveler, and could say, “In England, where I went...” The dowagers of the town would say to him, “You, who have been in England...” He had been as far as Lombardy, and seen the shores of the Italian lakes. He read new books. Finally, when he was cleaning his gloves, the tiger Babylas replied to callers, “Monsieur is very busy.” An attempt had been made to withdraw Monsieur Amedee de Soulas from circulation by pronouncing him “A man of advanced ideas.” Amedee had the gift of uttering with the gravity of a native the commonplaces that were in fashion, which gave him the credit of being one of the most enlightened of the nobility.

In 1834 Amedee was a young man of five-and-twenty, of medium height, dark, with a very prominent thorax, well-made shoulders, rather plump legs, feet already fat, white dimpled hands, a beard under his chin, moustaches worthy of the garrison, a good-natured, fat, rubicund face, a flat nose, and brown expressionless eyes; nothing Spanish about him. He was progressing rapidly in the direction of obesity, which would be fatal to his pretensions. His nails were well kept, his beard trimmed, the smallest details of his dress attended to with English precision. Hence Amedee de Soulas was looked upon as the finest man in Besancon. A hairdresser who waited upon him at a fixed hour--another luxury, costing sixty francs a year--held him up as the sovereign authority in matters of fashion and elegance.

Amedee slept late, dressed and went out towards noon, to go to one of his farms and practise pistol-shooting. He attached as much importance to this exercise as Lord Byron did in his later days. Then, at three o’clock he came home, admired on horseback by the grisettes and the ladies who happened to be at their windows. After an affectation of study or business, which seemed to engage him till four, he dressed to dine out, spent the evening in the drawing-rooms of the aristocracy of Besancon playing whist, and went home to bed at eleven. No life could be more above board, more prudent, or more irreproachable, for he punctually attended the services at church on Sundays and holy days.

To enable you to understand how exceptional is such a life, it is necessary to devote a few words to an account of Besancon. No town ever offered more deaf and dumb resistance to progress. At Besancon the officials, the employes, the military, in short, every one engaged in governing it, sent thither from Paris to fill a post of any kind, are all spoken of by the expressive general name of the Colony. The colony is neutral ground, the only ground where, as in church, the upper rank and the townsfolk of the place can meet. Here, fired by a word, a look, or gesture, are started those feuds between house and house, between a woman of rank and a citizen’s wife, which endure till death, and widen the impassable gulf which parts the two classes of society. With the exception of the Clermont-Mont-Saint-Jean, the Beauffremont, the de Scey, and the Gramont families, with a few others who come only to stay on their estates in the Comte, the aristocracy of Besancon dates no further back than a couple of centuries, the time of the conquest by Louis XIV. This little world is essentially of the parlement, and arrogant, stiff, solemn, uncompromising, haughty beyond all comparison, even with the Court of Vienna, for in this the nobility of Besancon would put the Viennese drawing-rooms to shame. As to Victor Hugo, Nodier, Fourier, the glories of the town, they are never mentioned, no one thinks about them. The marriages in these families are arranged in the cradle, so rigidly are the greatest things settled as well as the smallest. No stranger, no intruder, ever finds his way into one of these houses, and to obtain an introduction for the colonels or officers of title belonging to the first families in France when quartered there, requires efforts of diplomacy which Prince Talleyrand would gladly have mastered to use at a congress.

In 1834 Amedee was the only man in Besancon who wore trouser-straps; this will account for the young man’s being regarded as a lion. And a little anecdote will enable you to understand the city of Besancon.

Some time before the opening of this story, the need arose at the prefecture for bringing an editor from Paris for the official newspaper, to enable it to hold its own against the little Gazette, dropped at Besancon by the great Gazette, and the Patriot, which frisked in the hands of the Republicans. Paris sent them a young man, knowing nothing about la Franche Comte, who began by writing them a leading article of the school of the Charivari. The chief of the moderate party, a member of the municipal council, sent for the journalist and said to him, “You must understand, monsieur, that we are serious, more than serious--tiresome; we resent being amused, and are furious at having been made to laugh. Be as hard of digestion as the toughest disquisitions in the Revue des Deux Mondes, and you will hardly reach the level of Besancon.”

The editor took the hint, and thenceforth spoke the most incomprehensible philosophical lingo. His success was complete.

If young Monsieur de Soulas did not fall in the esteem of Besancon society, it was out of pure vanity on its part; the aristocracy were happy to affect a modern air, and to be able to show any Parisians of rank who visited the Comte a young man who bore some likeness to them.

All this hidden labor, all this dust thrown in people’s eyes, this display of folly and latent prudence, had an object, or the lion of Besancon would have been no son of the soil. Amedee wanted to achieve a good marriage by proving some day that his farms were not mortgaged, and that he had some savings. He wanted to be the talk of the town, to be the finest and best-dressed man there, in order to win first the attention, and then the hand, of Mademoiselle Rosalie de Watteville.

In 1830, at the time when young Monsieur de Soulas was setting up in business as a dandy, Rosalie was but fourteen. Hence, in 1834, Mademoiselle de Watteville had reached the age when young persons are easily struck by the peculiarities which attracted the attention of the town to Amedee. There are so many lions who become lions out of self-interest and speculation. The Wattevilles, who for twelve years had been drawing an income of fifty thousand francs a year, did not spend more than four-and-twenty thousand francs a year, while receiving all the upper circle of Besancon every Monday and Friday. On Monday they gave a dinner, on Friday an evening party. Thus, in twelve years, what a sum must have accumulated from twenty-six thousand francs a year, saved and invested with the judgment that distinguishes those old families! It was very generally supposed that Madame de Watteville, thinking she had land enough, had placed her savings in the three per cents, in 1830. Rosalie’s dowry would therefore, as the best informed opined, amount to about twenty thousand francs a year. So for the last five years Amedee had worked like a mole to get into the highest favor of the severe Baroness, while laying himself out to flatter Mademoiselle de Watteville’s conceit.

Madame de Watteville was in the secret of the devices by which Amedee succeeded in keeping up his rank in Besancon, and esteemed him highly for it. Soulas had placed himself under her wing when she was thirty, and at that time had dared to admire her and make her his idol; he had got so far as to be allowed--he alone in the world--to pour out to her all the unseemly gossip which almost all very precise women love to hear, being authorized by their superior virtue to look into the gulf without falling, and into the devil’s snares without being caught. Do you understand why the lion did not allow himself the very smallest intrigue? He lived a public life, in the street so to speak, on purpose to play the part of a lover sacrificed to duty by the Baroness, and to feast her mind with the sins she had forbidden to her senses. A man who is so privileged as to be allowed to pour light stories into the ear of a bigot is in her eyes a charming man. If this exemplary youth had better known the human heart, he might without risk have allowed himself some flirtations among the grisettes of Besancon who looked up to him as a king; his affairs might perhaps have been all the more hopeful with the strict and prudish Baroness. To Rosalie our Cato affected prodigality; he professed a life of elegance, showing her in perspective the splendid part played by a woman of fashion in Paris, whither he meant to go as Depute.

All these manoeuvres were crowned with complete success. In 1834 the mothers of the forty noble families composing the high society of Besancon quoted Monsieur Amedee de Soulas as the most charming young man in the town; no one would have dared to dispute his place as cock of the walk at the Hotel de Rupt, and all Besancon regarded him as Rosalie de Watteville’s future husband. There had even been some exchange of ideas on the subject between the Baroness and Amedee, to which the Baron’s apparent nonentity gave some certainty.

Mademoiselle de Watteville, to whom her enormous prospective fortune at that time lent considerable importance, had been brought up exclusively within the precincts of the Hotel de Rupt--which her mother rarely quitted, so devoted was she to her dear Archbishop--and severely repressed by an exclusively religious education, and by her mother’s despotism, which held her rigidly to principles. Rosalie knew absolutely nothing. Is it knowledge to have learned geography from Guthrie, sacred history, ancient history, the history of France, and the four rules all passed through the sieve of an old Jesuit? Dancing and music were forbidden, as being more likely to corrupt life than to grace it. The Baroness taught her daughter every conceivable stitch in tapestry and women’s work--plain sewing, embroidery, netting. At seventeen Rosalie had never read anything but the Lettres edifiantes and some works on heraldry. No newspaper had ever defiled her sight. She attended mass at the Cathedral every morning, taken there by her mother, came back to breakfast, did needlework after a little walk in the garden, and received visitors, sitting with the baroness until dinner-time. Then, after dinner, excepting on Mondays and Fridays, she accompanied Madame de Watteville to other houses to spend the evening, without being allowed to talk more than the maternal rule permitted.

At eighteen Mademoiselle de Watteville was a slight, thin girl with a flat figure, fair, colorless, and insignificant to the last degree. Her eyes, of a very light blue, borrowed beauty from their lashes, which, when downcast, threw a shadow on her cheeks. A few freckles marred the whiteness of her forehead, which was shapely enough. Her face was exactly like those of Albert Durer’s saints, or those of the painters before Perugino; the same plump, though slender modeling, the same delicacy saddened by ecstasy, the same severe guilelessness. Everything about her, even to her attitude, was suggestive of those virgins, whose beauty is only revealed in its mystical radiance to the eyes of the studious connoisseur. She had fine hands though red, and a pretty foot, the foot of an aristocrat.

She habitually wore simple checked cotton dresses; but on Sundays and in the evening her mother allowed her silk. The cut of her frocks, made at Besancon, almost made her ugly, while her mother tried to borrow grace, beauty, and elegance from Paris fashions; for through Monsieur de Soulas she procured the smallest trifles of her dress from thence. Rosalie had never worn a pair of silk stockings or thin boots, but always cotton stockings and leather shoes. On high days she was dressed in a muslin frock, her hair plainly dressed, and had bronze kid shoes.

This education, and her own modest demeanor, hid in Rosalie a spirit of iron. Physiologists and profound observers will tell you, perhaps to your astonishment, that tempers, characteristics, wit, or genius reappear in families at long intervals, precisely like what are known as hereditary diseases. Thus talent, like the gout, sometimes skips over two generations. We have an illustrious example of this phenomenon in George Sand, in whom are resuscitated the force, the power, and the imaginative faculty of the Marechal de Saxe, whose natural granddaughter she is.

The decisive character and romantic daring of the famous Watteville had reappeared in the soul of his grand-niece, reinforced by the tenacity and pride of blood of the Rupts. But these qualities--or faults, if you will have it so--were as deeply buried in this young girlish soul, apparently so weak and yielding, as the seething lavas within a hill before it becomes a volcano. Madame de Watteville alone, perhaps, suspected this inheritance from two strains. She was so severe to her Rosalie, that she replied one day to the Archbishop, who blamed her for being too hard on the child, “Leave me to manage her, monseigneur. I know her! She has more than one Beelzebub in her skin!”

The Baroness kept all the keener watch over her daughter, because she considered her honor as a mother to be at stake. After all, she had nothing else to do. Clotilde de Rupt, at this time five-and-thirty, and as good as widowed, with a husband who turned egg-cups in every variety of wood, who set his mind on making wheels with six spokes out of iron-wood, and manufactured snuff-boxes for everyone of his acquaintance, flirted in strict propriety with Amedee de Soulas. When this young man was in the house, she alternately dismissed and recalled her daughter, and tried to detect symptoms of jealousy in that youthful soul, so as to have occasion to repress them. She imitated the police in its dealings with the republicans; but she labored in vain. Rosalie showed no symptoms of rebellion. Then the arid bigot accused her daughter of perfect insensibility. Rosalie knew her mother well enough to be sure that if she had thought young Monsieur de Soulas nice, she would have drawn down on herself a smart reproof. Thus, to all her mother’s incitement she replied merely by such phrases as are wrongly called Jesuitical--wrongly, because the Jesuits were strong, and such reservations are the chevaux de frise behind which weakness takes refuge. Then the mother regarded the girl as a dissembler. If by mischance a spark of the true nature of the Wattevilles and the Rupts blazed out, the mother armed herself with the respect due from children to their parents to reduce Rosalie to passive obedience.

This covert battle was carried on in the most secret seclusion of domestic life, with closed doors. The Vicar-General, the dear Abbe Grancey, the friend of the late Archbishop, clever as he was in his capacity of the chief Father Confessor of the diocese, could not discover whether the struggle had stirred up some hatred between the mother and daughter, whether the mother were jealous in anticipation, or whether the court Amedee was paying to the girl through her mother had not overstepped its due limits. Being a friend of the family, neither mother nor daughter, confessed to him. Rosalie, a little too much harried, morally, about young de Soulas, could not abide him, to use a homely phrase, and when he spoke to her, trying to take her heart by surprise, she received him but coldly. This aversion, discerned only by her mother’s eyes, was a constant subject of admonition.

“Rosalie, I cannot imagine why you affect such coldness towards Amedee. Is it because he is a friend of the family, and because we like him--your father and I?”

“Well, mamma,” replied the poor child one day, “if I made him welcome, should I not be still more in the wrong?”

“What do you mean by that?” cried Madame de Watteville. “What is the meaning of such words? Your mother is unjust, no doubt, and according to you, would be so in any case! Never let such an answer pass your lips again to your mother--” and so forth.

This quarrel lasted three hours and three-quarters. Rosalie noted the time. Her mother, pale with fury, sent her to her room, where Rosalie pondered on the meaning of this scene without discovering it, so guileless was she. Thus young Monsieur de Soulas, who was supposed by every one to be very near the end he was aiming at, all neckcloths set, and by dint of pots of patent blacking--an end which required so much waxing of his moustaches, so many smart waistcoats, wore out so many horseshoes and stays--for he wore a leather vest, the stays of the lion--Amedee, I say, was further away than any chance comer, although he had on his side the worthy and noble Abbe de Grancey.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“Madame,” said Monsieur de Soulas to the Baroness, waiting for his soup to cool and giving a romantic turn to his tale, “one fine morning the mail coach dropped at the Hotel National a gentleman from Paris, who, after seeking apartments, chose the first floor in Mademoiselle Galard’s house, Rue du Perron. The stranger then went to the Mairie and had himself registered as a resident with all political qualifications. Finally, he had his name entered on the list of barristers to the Court, showing his title in due form, and left his card on all his new colleagues, the Ministerial officials, the Councillors of the Court, and the members of the bench, under the name ‘ALBERT SAVARON.’”

“The name of Savaron is famous,” said Mademoiselle de Watteville, versed in heraldry. “The Savarons of Savarus are one of the oldest, noblest, and richest families in Belgium.”

“He is a Frenchman, and no man’s son,” replied Amedee de Soulas. “If he wishes to bear the arms of the Savarons of Savarus, he must add a bar-sinister. There is no one left of the Brabant family but a Mademoiselle de Savarus, a rich heiress, and unmarried.”

“The bar-sinister is, of course, the badge of a bastard; but the bastard of a Comte de Savarus is noble,” answered Rosalie.

“Enough, that will do, mademoiselle!” said the Baroness.

“You insisted on her learning heraldry,” said Monsieur de Watteville, “and she knows it very well.”

“Go on, I beg, Monsieur de Soulas.”

“You may suppose that in a town where everything is classified, pigeon-holed, ticketed, and numbered, as in Besancon, Albert Savaron was received without hesitation by the lawyers. They said, ‘Here is a man who does not know Besancon. Who sent him here? What can he hope to do? Sending his card to the Judges instead of calling in person! What a blunder!’ And so, three days after, Savaron had ceased to exist. He took as his servant old Monsieur Galard’s man—Galard being dead—Jerome, who can cook a little. Albert Savaron was more completely forgotten because no one had seen him anywhere.”

“Then, does he not go to mass?” asked Madame de Chavoncourt.

“He goes on Sundays to Saint-Pierre, but to the early service at eight. He rises every night between one and two, works till eight, has his breakfast, and works again. He walks in his garden, fifty or sixty times; then he goes in, dines, and goes to bed between six and seven.”

“How did you learn all that?” asked Madame de Chavoncourt.

“In the first place, madame, I live in the Rue Neuve at the corner of the Rue du Perron; I look out on the house where this mysterious person lodges; then, of course, there are communications between my tiger and Jerome.”

“And you gossip with Babylas?”

“What would you have me do out riding?”

“Well—and how was it that you engaged a stranger for your defence?” asked the Baroness, turning the conversation to the Vicar-General.

“The President of the Court played this pleader a trick by appointing him to defend at the Assizes a half-witted peasant accused of forgery. But Monsieur Savaron procured the poor man’s acquittal by proving his innocence and showing that he had been a tool of the real culprits. Not only did his defence succeed, but it led to the arrest of two witnesses, who were proved guilty and condemned. His speech struck the Court and the jury. One of these, a merchant, placed a difficult case next day in Monsieur Savaron’s hands, and he won it. Monsieur Berryer could not come to Besancon; Monsieur de Garcenault advised employing Monsieur Albert Savaron, foretelling our success. As soon as I saw and heard him, I felt faith in him, and I was not wrong.”

“Is he then so extraordinary?” asked Madame de Chavoncourt.

“Certainly, madame,” replied the Vicar-General.

“Well, tell us about it,” said Madame de Watteville.

“The first time I saw him,” said the Abbe de Grancey, “he received me in his outer room next the ante-room—old Galard’s drawing-room—which he has had painted like old oak, lined with law-books arranged on shelves also painted as old oak. The painting and the books are the sole decoration; the furniture consists of an old carved writing table, six old armchairs covered with tapestry, window curtains of gray stuff bordered with green, and a green carpet. The ante-room stove heats this library. As I waited I did not picture my advocate as a young man. But this singular setting suits him; Monsieur Savaron came out in a black merino dressing-gown tied with a red cord, red slippers, a red flannel waistcoat, and a red smoking-cap.”

“The devil’s colors!” exclaimed Madame de Watteville.

“Yes,” said the Abbe; “but a magnificent head. Black hair streaked with gray, hair like that of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in pictures, with thick shining curls, hair as stiff as horse-hair; a round white throat like a woman’s; a splendid forehead furrowed by the strong median line which great schemes stamp on a great man’s brow; an olive complexion marbled with red; a square nose; eyes of flame; hollow cheeks marked by two long lines betraying much suffering; a mouth with a sardonic smile, and a small, narrow, too-short chin; crow’s feet on his temples; deep-set eyes, moving in their sockets like burning balls; yet despite these signs of a violently passionate nature, his manner was calm, deeply resigned, and his voice of penetrating sweetness, which surprised me in Court by its easy flow; a true orator’s voice, clear and appealing, sometimes insinuating, but a voice of thunder when needful, and incisive in sarcasm.

“Monsieur Albert Savaron is of middle height, neither stout nor thin. His hands are those of a prelate.

“The second time I called he received me in his bedroom adjoining the library, and smiled at my astonishment when I saw there a wretched chest of drawers, a shabby carpet, a camp-bed, and cotton curtains. He came out of his private room, to which no one is admitted, as Jerome informed me; the man did not enter, but merely knocked at the door.

“The third time he was breakfasting in his library on frugal fare; he had spent the night studying our documents, and as I had my attorney with me, that worthy Monsieur Girardet being long-winded, I had leisure to study the stranger. He certainly is no ordinary man. There is more than one secret behind that face, at once so terrible and so gentle, patient and yet impatient, broad and yet hollow. I saw, too, that he stooped a little, like men who bear some heavy burden.”

“Why did so eloquent a man leave Paris? For what purpose did he come to Besancon?” asked Madame de Chavoncourt. “Could no one tell him how little chance a stranger has of succeeding here? The good folks of Besancon will use him, but will not let him use them. Why, having come, did he make so little effort that it needed a freak of the President’s to bring him forward?”

“After carefully studying that fine head,” said the Abbe, looking keenly at the lady who had interrupted him in a way that suggested he would not tell everything, “and especially after hearing him this morning reply to one of the bigwigs of the Paris Bar, I believe that this man, who may be five-and-thirty, will by and by make a great sensation.”

“Why should we discuss him? You have gained your action, and paid him,” said Madame de Watteville, watching her daughter, who had hung on the Vicar-General’s words.

The conversation changed, and no more was heard of Albert Savaron.

The portrait sketched by the cleverest of the Vicars-General charmed Rosalie because there was romance behind it. For the first time she had come across the marvelous, the exceptional, which smiles on youthful imagination, and which curiosity at Rosalie’s age eagerly meets halfway. What an ideal being: gloomy, unhappy, eloquent, laborious—far removed from Mademoiselle de Watteville’s notion of men like the chubby Count, bursting with health and talking fashion in the face of old splendor. Amedee had cost her many quarrels and scoldings, and she knew him only too well; Albert Savaron offered many enigmas.

“Albert Savaron de Savarus,” she repeated.

Now, to see him, to catch sight of him! This was Rosalie’s new desire. She pondered in her heart and fancy every phrase of the Abbe de Grancey, for his words had told.

“A fine forehead!” she said, looking at the heads of those at table; “I do not see one fine one.—Monsieur de Soulas’ is too prominent; Monsieur de Grancey’s is fine, but he is seventy and has no hair, it is impossible to see where his forehead ends.”

“What is the matter, Rosalie; you are eating nothing?”

“I am not hungry, mamma,” she said. “A prelate’s hands...” she thought. “I cannot remember our Archbishop’s hands, though he confirmed me.”

In the tangle of her meditations, she remembered a lighted window she had seen from her bed gleaming through the trees of two adjoining gardens when she woke in the night. “Then that was his light!” she thought. “I might see him! I will see him.”

“Monsieur de Grancey, is the Chapter’s lawsuit quite settled?” said Rosalie point-blank to the Vicar-General, during a moment of silence.

Madame de Watteville exchanged rapid glances with the Abbe.

“What can that matter to you, my dear child?” she said with an affected sweetness that made her daughter cautious thereafter.

“It might be carried to the Court of Appeal, but our adversaries will think twice about that,” replied the Abbe.

“I never could have believed that Rosalie would think about a lawsuit all through a dinner,” remarked Madame de Watteville.

“Nor I either,” said Rosalie dreamily, which made everyone laugh. “But Monsieur de Grancey was so full of it, that I was interested.”

The company rose and returned to the drawing-room. All evening Rosalie listened for any mention of Albert Savaron; beyond congratulations to the Abbe on his suit, no praise of the advocate was added. Mademoiselle de Watteville impatiently looked forward to bedtime. She had promised herself to wake between two and three and watch Albert’s dressing-room windows. When the hour came, she felt almost pleasure in gazing at the glimmer of the lawyer’s candles through the trees, now almost bare. By the help of a young girl’s strong sight, she saw Albert writing and fancied she could distinguish the color of the furniture, which she thought red. From the chimney above the roof rose a thick column of smoke.

“While all the world is sleeping, he is awake—like God!” she thought.

The education of girls brings serious problems—the future of a nation is in the mother—so the University of France long since set itself the task of having nothing to do with it. Ought girls to be informed on all points, or kept in restraint? Enlighten them and they may be demons before their time; restrain them and they may explode like Moliere’s Agnes. This inevitable crisis was brought on in Mademoiselle de Watteville by the portrait which one of the most prudent Abbes of the Chapter imprudently sketched at a dinner party.

Next morning, dressing, Mademoiselle de Watteville looked out at Albert Savaron walking in the garden adjoining that of the Hotel de Rupt.

“What would have become of me,” she thought, “if he had lived elsewhere? Here I can at least see him.—What is he thinking about?”

Having seen this extraordinary man, the only face standing out among Besancon’s, Rosalie at once conceived the idea of getting into his house, of ascertaining the reason for so much mystery, of hearing that eloquent voice, of winning a glance from those fine eyes. All this she set her heart on, but how to achieve it?

That day she drew her needle with the concentrated air of a girl like Agnes, seeming to think of nothing but pondering deeply. From this meditation Rosalie decided to go to confession. Next morning, after Mass, she had a brief interview with Abbe Giroud at Saint-Pierre and managed so ingeniously that her confession was fixed for Sunday morning at half-past seven, before the eight o’clock Mass. She told a dozen fibs to be in church at the hour the lawyer came to Mass. Then she was seized with an impulse of extreme affection for her father; she visited his workroom, asked questions about turning, and advised him to turn larger pieces, columns. After persuading him to work on twisted pillars, she suggested using a heap of stones in the garden to construct a grotto on which to erect a little temple or Belvedere where his twisted pillars could be shown off.

At the climax of the pleasure the unoccupied man derived from this scheme, Rosalie said, as she kissed him, “Above all, do not tell mamma who gave you the notion; she would scold me.”

“Do not be afraid!” replied Monsieur de Watteville, who groaned as bitterly as his daughter under the tyranny of the terrible descendant of the Rupts.

So Rosalie had a prospect of a charming observatory being built, whence her eye would command the lawyer’s private room. There are men for whose sake young girls will carry out such masterstrokes of diplomacy, while, for the most part, like Albert Savaron, they know it not.

The Sunday arrived, and Rosalie dressed with a care that made Mariette, the ladies’-maid, smile.

“It is the first time I ever knew mademoiselle to be so fidgety,” said Mariette.

“It strikes me,” said Rosalie, with a glance that brought color to Mariette’s cheeks, “that you too are more particular on some days than on others.”

As she went down, across the courtyard, and through the gates, Rosalie’s heart beat as at the approach of a great event. Hitherto, she had never known what it was to walk in the streets; for a moment she feared her mother would read her schemes on her brow and forbid her going to confession; she now felt new blood in her feet, lifting them as though she trod on fire. She had arranged to be with her confessor at a quarter-past eight, saying eight to her mother, to have about a quarter of an hour near Albert. She got to church before Mass and, after a short prayer, checked if Abbe Giroud were in his confessional to pass the time; thus she placed herself to see Albert as he came into church.

The man must have been atrociously ugly who did not seem handsome to Mademoiselle de Watteville in the frame of mind produced by her curiosity. And Albert Savaron, who was striking, made more impression because his mien, walk, carriage, everything down to his clothing, had that indescribable stamp called Mystery.

He came in. The church, till then gloomy, seemed illuminated to Rosalie. She was fascinated by his slow, solemn demeanor, as of a man who bears a world on his shoulders and whose deep gaze and gestures express a devastating thought. Rosalie now understood the Vicar-General’s words in full. Yes, those tawny-brown eyes shot with golden lights covered ardor that flashed suddenly. Rosalie, with a recklessness Mariette noted, stood in the lawyer’s way to exchange glances; this glance turned her blood, which seethed and boiled as though its warmth were doubled.

As soon as Albert took a seat, Mademoiselle de Watteville found a place to see him perfectly while the Abbe might leave her. When Mariette said, “Here is Monsieur Giroud,” it seemed to Rosalie that the interview had lasted no more than a few minutes. By the time she left the confessional, Mass was over. Albert had left the church.

“The Vicar-General was right,” she thought. “He is unhappy. Why should this eagle—for he has the eyes of an eagle—swoop down on Besancon? Oh, I must know everything! But how?”

Under the smart of this new desire Rosalie set the stitches of her worsted-work with exquisite precision and hid her meditations under a little innocent air, feigning simplicity to deceive Madame de Watteville.

From that Sunday, when Mademoiselle de Watteville had met that look, or, if you please, received this baptism of fire—a fine expression of Napoleon’s applicable to love—she eagerly promoted the Belvedere plan.

“Mamma,” she said one day when two columns were turned, “my father has taken a singular idea into his head; he is turning columns for a Belvedere he intends to erect on the heap of stones in the middle of the garden. Do you approve? It seems to me—”

“I approve of everything your father does,” said Madame de Watteville drily, “and it is a wife’s duty to submit to her husband even if she does not approve. Why should I object to something of no importance if it amuses Monsieur de Watteville?”

“Well, because from there we shall see into Monsieur de Soulas’ rooms, and Monsieur de Soulas will see us when we are there. Perhaps remarks may be made—”

“Do you presume, Rosalie, to guide your parents, and think you know more than they do of life and the proprieties?”

“I say no more, mamma. Besides, my father said there would be a room in the grotto, cool, where we can take coffee.”

“Your father has had an excellent idea,” said Madame de Watteville, who went to look at the columns.

She gave entire approbation to the Baron de Watteville’s design, choosing a spot at the bottom of the garden which could not be seen from Monsieur de Soulas’ windows, but whence they could perfectly see into Albert Savaron’s rooms. A builder was sent for to construct a grotto, whose top would be reached by a narrow path through rock-work, where periwinkles, iris, clematis, ivy, honeysuckle, and Virginia creeper would grow. The Baroness desired the inside lined with rustic wood-work, a looking-glass, an ottoman forming a box, and a table of inlaid bark. Monsieur de Soulas proposed an asphalt floor. Rosalie suggested a hanging chandelier of rustic wood.

“The Wattevilles are having something charming done in their garden,” was rumored in Besancon.

“They are rich, and can afford a thousand crowns for a whim—”

“A thousand crowns!” exclaimed Madame de Chavoncourt.

“Yes, a thousand crowns,” cried young Monsieur de Soulas. “A man has been sent from Paris to rusticate the interior but it will be very pretty. Monsieur de Watteville himself is making the chandelier, and has begun to carve the wood.”

“Berquet is to make a cellar under it,” said an Abbe.

“No,” replied young Monsieur de Soulas, “he is raising the kiosk on a concrete foundation, that it may not be damp.”

“You know the very least things that are done in that house,” said Madame de Chavoncourt sourly, as she looked at one of her great girls waiting to be married for a year.

Mademoiselle de Watteville, pleased at the success of her Belvedere, felt a vast superiority over those about her. No one guessed that a little girl supposed to be a witless goose had schemed to get a closer view of the lawyer’s private study.

Albert Savaron’s brilliant defence of the Cathedral Chapter was sooner forgotten because the other lawyers’ envy was aroused. Savaron, faithful to his seclusion, went nowhere. Having no friends to cry him up, and seeing no one, he increased the chance of being forgotten as strangers are in Besancon. Nevertheless, he pleaded three times at the Commercial Tribunal in knotty cases which had to be carried to the superior Court, and thus gained four chief merchants as clients, who recognized his good sense and legal acumen and placed their claims in his hands.

On the day the Watteville family inaugurated the Belvedere, Savaron also was founding a monument. Thanks to connections he had obscurely formed among merchants, he was starting a fortnightly paper, the Eastern Review, with forty shares of five hundred francs each taken by his first ten clients, whom he convinced of the need to promote Besancon as the traffic centre between Mulhouse and Lyons and between Mulhouse and the Rhone.

To compete with Strasbourg, Besancon must become a focus of enlightenment as well as trade. Leading questions for Eastern France could be handled in a review. What a task to rob Strasbourg and Dijon of literary importance, bring light to the East, and compete with Paris’s centralizing influence! These reflections, put forward by Albert, were repeated by the ten merchants, who believed them their own.

Monsieur Savaron did not put his name in front; he left the finance to his chief client, Monsieur Boucher, connected by marriage with a great publisher, but kept the editorship, with a share of the profits as founder. The commercial appeal reached Dole, Dijon, Salins, Neufchatel, the Jura, Bourg, Nantua, Lons-le-Saulnier. He invited the learning and energy of every scientific student in the districts. By commercial interest and common feeling, five hundred subscribers were booked at a low price; the Review cost eight francs a quarter.

To avoid hurting provincials’ conceit by refusing articles, the lawyer suggested the literary management to Monsieur Boucher’s eldest son, a young man of twenty-two eager for fame and ignorant of literary snares. Albert quietly kept the upper hand and made Alfred Boucher his devoted adherent. Alfred came in the morning to discuss articles with Albert in the garden. The trial number contained a “Meditation” by Alfred, which Savaron approved. In their conversations Albert let drop great ideas, subjects for articles Alfred availed himself of, and so the merchant’s son fancied he made capital from the great man. The commercial world, enchanted at the Review’s success, had to pay only three-tenths of their shares. Two hundred more subscribers and the periodical would pay a five percent dividend to shareholders, the editor remaining unpaid.

After the third number the Review was recognized for exchange by all papers in France, which Albert henceforth read at home. This third number included a tale signed “A. S.,” attributed to the famous lawyer. Despite small attention by Besancon’s higher circle, who accused the Review of Liberal views, this first novel produced in the county came under discussion that midwinter in Madame de Chavoncourt’s drawing-room.

“Papa,” said Rosalie, “a Review is published in Besancon; you ought to take it and keep it in your room, for mamma would not let me read it, but you will lend it to me.”

Monsieur de Watteville, eager to obey his dear Rosalie, who for five months had shown much filial affection, subscribed for a year and lent the four numbers out to his daughter. That night Rosalie devoured the tale—the first she had ever read—though she had known life for only two months. Hence the effect on her must not be judged by ordinary rules. Without deciding on the composition’s merit, whether from a Parisian importing the brilliancy of a new literary school, it could not fail to be a masterpiece to a young girl abandoning all her intelligence and innocent heart to her first reading of this kind.

Also, from what she had heard, Rosalie by intuition conceived an idea that strangely enhanced the interest of this novel. She hoped to find in it sentiments, perhaps the life, of Albert. From the first pages this opinion took strong hold, and after reading the fragment to the end she was certain it was no mistake. Here, then, was a confession, which, according to the critics in Madame de Chavoncourt’s drawing-room, Albert had imitated from modern writers who, lacking inventiveness, relate their private joys, private griefs, or the mysterious events of their own lives.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In 1823 two young men, having agreed to tour Switzerland for a holiday, set out from Lucerne one fine July morning in a boat pulled by three oarsmen. They were bound for Fluelen, intending to stop at every notable spot on the lake of the Four Cantons. The scenery from Lucerne to Fluelen offers every combination of mountains and waters: austere solitudes and charming headlands, trim meadows, forests crowning perpendicular granite cliffs, deserted verdant reaches, and valleys whose beauty increases with the dreamy distance.

As they passed the pretty hamlet of Gersau, one friend long watched a newly built wooden house on a promontory nearly bathed by the waters. In the upper story a woman’s head was raised at the window to admire the effect of the boat on the lake, and one of the young men met her indifferent glance.

“Let us stop here,” he said. “We meant to make Lucerne our headquarters; Leopold, you will not mind if I stay here and take charge of our possessions. You can go where you please; my journey ends.” The other agreed without much objection.

They were true friends of the same age, schoolmates who had studied law and were taking the classic Swiss tour. Leopold was already pledged to a notary’s office in Paris by his father’s arrangement; orderly, gentle, and rational, he accepted the future of a Parisian notary with philosophical resignation. His companion, Rodolphe, presented a strong contrast. The natural son of a man of rank who died prematurely, Rodolphe’s mother had sold what she had inherited to buy a life annuity so she could educate him and save a small capital for him at majority. Rodolphe was extremely sensitive and ardent: desire became the guiding force of his imagination and actions. His mother, fearing his impetuous temperament, encouraged his friendship with Leopold, seeing in the cool, faithful Leopold a kind of guardian. She herself, handsome at forty-three, had inspired in Leopold an ardent passion, making the two young men even closer.

So it pleased no one to see Rodolphe stop the projected journey because of a single glance at that upper window. While breakfast was prepared at the Swan Inn, the friends walked about the hamlet and found the new house; Rodolphe discovered a residence of decent folk willing to take him as a boarder—a common Swiss custom. For a hundred francs a month (the Friedmans insisted on three months’ residence and a month’s rent in advance), he obtained a bedroom overlooking the lake and the mountains. He deposited his traveling effects and watched Leopold row away. When Leopold’s boat was out of sight, Rodolphe examined the new house, hoping to see the unknown. The house seemed lifeless, but at dinner with Monsieur and Madame Stopfer, retired coopers from Neufchatel, he learned the neighbor’s story: the fair stranger was called Fanny Lovelace.

Miss Lovelace (pronounced Loveless) had come for her father’s health, the physicians having recommended Lucerne’s air. They had arrived with only one servant, a fourteen-year-old deaf-mute girl much attached to Miss Fanny, and had settled two winters before with Monsieur and Madame Bergmann, the retired head-gardeners of Count Borromeo of Isola Bella and Isola Madre. The Bergmanns let the top story of their house to the Lovelaces for three years at a rent of two hundred francs a year. Old Lovelace, about ninety and broken, was too poor to go out often; his daughter translated and wrote to support him. They could not afford boats or guides. The Bergmanns, who had made beautiful gardens and a hothouse, were thought to profit from the bargain despite their appearance of modesty. Miss Fanny, said to be nineteen, adored flowers and music and had even hired a piano from Lucerne.

“She loves flowers and music, and she is unmarried!” thought Rodolphe—what luck.

Next day he asked to visit the hothouses and gardens. The Bergmanns suspiciously asked for his passport, which delayed him; it was returned the next morning via the cook, who expressed her master’s pleasure in showing him around. With trepidation Rodolphe, dressed carefully, toured the grounds, kept at a distance by the gardeners’ distrust. His attention was soon drawn to the little deaf-mute, whom he recognized as of African or at least Sicilian origin: golden-brown complexion, long lashes, very dark hair, strong sinewy limbs. She watched him with unusual curiosity and effrontery.

“To whom does that little Moresco belong?” he asked.

“To the English,” Monsieur Bergmann replied.

“But she was not born in England!”

“They may have brought her from the Indies,” Madame Bergmann suggested.

Rodolphe said he loved music and would be delighted to join Miss Lovelace, but the gardeners said they received no visitors. Disappointed, he left. In the evening he rowed on the lake and heard a piano and a lovely voice from the house. He had the boat wait; after the song, he landed, sent away the boatmen, and sat under a granite shelf by a thick acacia hedge. After listening, he crawled to the end of the avenue and concealed himself to watch two women talking in Italian. To his surprise, the deaf-mute spoke Italian and was not mute. The two women were the “English” pair, and Rodolphe guessed they were Italian refugees, living in fear, speaking in Italian after dark.

Crawling through the hedge to surprise them, he rose and spoke in French to the Italian. Immediately he felt a sharp pain in his side and fell. “Nel lago con pietra!” cried the deaf-mute. He found he’d been stabbed with a stiletto that had grazed him; had it been a little higher, it would have been fatal. He drew the stiletto from his wound and, in spite of the pain, begged forgiveness and asked Francesca (the name he had heard) to show him the way out. Francesca helped him up; Gina—who was not dumb—opened his shirt and sucked the wound, then Francesca applied a plaster. Each took an arm and led him to a side gate; Gina stayed to see him to the Stopfers’ door and fled after ringing. Rodolphe thought the patriots did not play at killing, and later sent to Lucerne for the best surgeon, insisting on secrecy for the sake of his honor.

Leopold returned the day Rodolphe first got out of bed with fatal news: Rodolphe’s mother was dead. The letter had reached Lucerne while they were on their way to Fluelen. Rodolphe fell ill with a nervous fever; once convalescent, he sent Leopold to France with a power of attorney so he could stay at Gersau, the only place where his grief could quieten. The circumstance and his sorrow won him widespread pity and interest. Every morning the “mute” came to bring news of her mistress.

When Rodolphe could go out, he visited the Bergmanns’ to thank Miss Fanny Lovelace and her father for their interest. For the first time the old Italian admitted a stranger to his room. Francesca by candlelight was striking: her smiles threw roses on his grieving heart, and she sang grave, fitting melodies. Later she took him on the balcony to a rustic bench overlooking the sublime scenery. Rodolphe asked her age.

“Nineteen,” she said.

“If anything could soothe my sorrow it would be the hope of winning you,” he confessed, declaring a deep, eternal passion and offering, trembling, half his small inheritance to help her fortune. Francesca interrupted: “Zitto! I am not free. I have been married these three years.” He fainted from the shock.

When revived, he pleaded, but she warned him gently: her husband, Emilio, was sixty-five—disguised to seem older to mislead the police. Francesca spoke with frank dignity: married without her consent, she accepted the laws of marriage and would never wish to be free; she could love, but would not abandon her duty. She asked Rodolphe to understand that she could restrain passion when it conflicted with her ideas. She desired to be loved and waited nobly, and all she could give was an “infinite tenderness” expressed within the heart’s bounds. She urged him to make a splendid fortune and to use his talents for mankind; fame might be the bridge over the gulf between them. Her manner and words were plain, true, and stamped with sincerity.

In their two-hour conversation, Rodolphe discovered Francesca’s enthusiasm for liberal ideas—the worship of liberty that had led to revolutions in Naples, Piedmont, and Spain. On leaving, Gina showed him to the door. At eleven, when all was still, Rodolphe took Gina aside and offered a gold piece for information; she named Francesca’s master as the bookseller Lamporani of Milan, a leader of the revolution whom Austria would like to have in the Spielberg. Gina also said Francesca’s father’s name was Colonna. Emboldened, Rodolphe fitted an awning and cushions to his boat and asked Francesca for a row on the lake; she accepted but brought Gina and behaved with the dignity of high birth. Her actions betrayed a superior education and rank; Rodolphe felt cut off by her proud manner. Gina gave a mocking side glance.

“Where would you go, Signora Lamporani?” he asked.

“Towards Lucerne,” she replied in French.

He sat by her, begging for her hand; she withdrew it. She explained more fully that she had the strength to stifle a feeling if it were incompatible with her idea of true love. Married to an old man who generously allowed her liberty, three years of marriage implied acceptance of its rules. Emilio knew her character and would not take her hand without her heart; therefore, no intoxication would make her wish to be free. Despite this, she promised to be coquettish, gay, and childlike within the permitted confines.

Rodolphe accepted this “treaty” gladly, seeing in her reserved tenderness a sublime kind of love. Francesca’s dignity and modest poverty—she said their work provided their luxuries—moved him. He declared he would wait faithfully, burning with respect and ambition to be worthy of her. She smiled with a subtle, Gioconda-like expression and, with serious eyes, encouraged his ambition for mankind rather than for her. Their mutual understanding brought them serene delight; this hour of reciprocal confidence, set in the spectacular scenery, felt like a unique rebirth for Rodolphe, who mourned his mother but found consolation in Francesca’s tenderness.

Their bliss was interrupted by a boat from Lucerne. Gina, watching, started with joy. A young man approached—Tito. Francesca called out and the two boats pulled alongside one another. Tito and Francesca exchanged rapid words in a dialect Rodolphe could not understand, and Gina’s delight and Tito’s handsome face provoked Rodolphe’s displeasure. Tito tossed a leather bag to Gina and letters to Francesca, who read them with evident excitement.

“La liberta!” she cried—freedom! Gina echoed, “E denaro!”—and Francesca explained: no more poverty; she had been working for eleven months and was beginning to be tired; within three weeks they would be at Geneva and living at ease. Tito was the Secretary of State in the Colonna shop—he had come by sea via Marseilles and crossed France. Francesca was radiant: within a year there might be an amnesty for their cause. Gina wept with relief. Rodolphe felt crushed: he had sympathized in Francesca’s sorrow and could not share in her joy.

Back at the Bergmanns’, Rodolphe found the old man transformed by the good news. He now appeared about sixty, straight as an I, with black hair showing a white skull, bright eyes, and a sardonic smile—the librarian in his natural form. Francesca declared, simply, “Here is my husband under his natural form.” The old man, who had played many parts in his life, admitted he had disguised himself; he had acted roles, even in Paris under the Empire, and boasted an education that enabled him to survive. He called himself Emilio, and said Francesca had been obliged to work to maintain him.

Rodolphe, suspicious, kept watchful silence. Francesca, meanwhile, laughed at his question about her husband’s youth. “He is but sixty-five,” she said, “which is something to be thankful for!” Yet she insisted Emilio was simple as a child and under her protection. She related, half banter, half pride, episodes of family honor and devotion: Emilio once risked life and fortune because of her Liberal opinions, despite not sharing them—was that not love? Her mixture of dignity and playfulness made her irresistibly charming. The dinner and evening were full of cheer for the refugees but left Rodolphe depressed.

“Can she be fickle?” he wondered. He blamed himself for expecting Parisian propriety from an impulsive Italian who showed no hypocrisy and was carried away by feeling. Rodolphe wanted Francesca to be like a Parisian woman, but she was Italian: proud, sincere, ardent, and independent in both heart and mind.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Next day and for twenty days after, Rodolphe spent all his time at the Bergmanns’, watching Francesca though he had not resolved to. In some souls admiration implies a kind of penetration. The young Frenchman perceived Francesca’s girlish imprudence, the true nature of a woman not yet broken—sometimes resisting love, sometimes yielding to it. The old man treated her like a father, and she returned gratitude that awoke her native nobility. The situation and the woman remained an impenetrable enigma to Rodolphe, and solving it increasingly attracted him.

Those days were full of secret joys alternating with melancholy, with tiffs and quarrels more delightful than hours of mutual accord. He grew fascinated by a constant tenderness, an affection jealous of trifles.

“You care very much for luxury?” he asked one evening, as Francesca expressed her desire to leave Gersau where she missed many things.

“I!” she cried. “I love luxury as I love art—a Raphael, a fine horse, a beautiful day, or the Bay of Naples. Emilio,” she added, “have I ever complained in our days of privation?”

“You would not have been yourself if you had,” the old man answered gravely.

“Is it not natural for plain folks to aspire to grandeur?” she asked with a mischievous glance at Rodolphe and her husband. “Were my feet made for fatigue?” she added, showing her pretty feet. “My hands”—she offered one to Rodolphe—“were these hands made to work?—Leave us,” she told her husband; “I want to speak to him.”

The old man, ingenuous and confident, retired to the drawing-room, sure of his wife.

“I will not have you come with us to Geneva,” she told Rodolphe. “It is a gossiping town. Though I am above its nonsense, I will not be calumniated, not for myself but for him. I pride myself on being that old man’s glory, his only protector. We are leaving; stay here a few days. When you come to Geneva, call on my husband first; he will introduce you. Let us hide our unchangeable affection from the world. I love you; you know it; but I will prove it by never giving you cause for jealousy.”

She drew him into a balcony corner, kissed his forehead, and fled, leaving him astonished.

Next day Rodolphe learned the Bergmanns’ lodgers had left at daybreak. It seemed intolerable to remain in Gersau, and he set out for Vevay by the longest route, reaching Geneva by the end of October, drawn by the lake where the beautiful Italian awaited him. To avoid the town’s inconveniences he took rooms at Eaux-Vives, outside the walls. His first inquiry was whether Italian refugees from Milan had come to Geneva.

“Not so far as I know,” the landlord, a retired jeweler, replied. “Prince and Princess Colonna of Rome have taken Monsieur Jeanrenaud’s house for three years; it stands between the Villa Diodati and Monsieur Lafin-de-Dieu’s, let to the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. Prince Colonna has come to see his daughter and son-in-law Prince Gandolphini, a Neapolitan or Sicilian, an old adherent of King Murat’s and victim of the last revolution. These are the newest arrivals here. Geneva is careful not to offend the Holy Alliance; our part is not to ruffle foreign courts. There are many foreigners—Russians and English.”

“Even some Geneva folk?”

“Yes, monsieur, our lake is so fine! Lord Byron lived at Villa Diodati and people still go to see it.”

“You cannot tell me whether a bookseller from Milan has arrived with his wife—named Lamporani, a leader of the last revolution?”

“I could find out at the Foreigners’ Club,” said the jeweler.

Rodolphe’s first walk was naturally to Villa Diodati, whose recent occupant’s death added to its attraction: death consecrates genius.

The road to Eaux-Vives follows the lake and is narrow; a few yards from Jeanrenaud’s house, as he approached unknowingly, Rodolphe heard a carriage behind him. Finding himself in a sunk road, he climbed a rock to let it pass and looked at the approaching phaeton—an elegant English vehicle with splendid horses. He felt dizzy as he saw Francesca, beautifully dressed, beside an old lady like a cameo; a servant blazing with gold lace stood behind. Francesca recognized Rodolphe and smiled at the sight of him like a statue. The carriage turned into a gate of a country house; Rodolphe ran toward it.

“Who lives here?” he asked the gardener.

“Prince and Princess Colonna, and Prince and Princess Gandolphini.”

“Have they not just driven in?”

“Yes.”

In that instant a veil fell from Rodolphe’s eyes; he understood the meaning of the past.

“If only this is her last piece of trickery!” he thought, thunder-struck.

He trembled at the thought he might have been the plaything of a whim, for he had heard what capriccio could mean in an Italian. What crime had he committed in a woman’s eyes—accepting a born princess as a citizen’s wife?—in believing a daughter of an ancient house to be a bookseller’s wife! The consciousness of his error increased his desire to see whether he would be ignored. He asked for Prince Gandolphini, sent in his card, and was received by the false Lamporani, who welcomed him and led him to a terrace overlooking Geneva, the Jura, villas, and the lake.

“My wife is faithful to the lakes, you see,” he remarked. “We have a sort of concert this evening,” he added. “I hope you will honor the Princess and me. Two months of poverty endured in intimacy are equal to years of friendship.”

Though consumed by curiosity, Rodolphe dared not ask to see the Princess; he returned to Eaux-Vives, waiting for the evening. Anxiety and suspense heightened his passion. He now understood the necessity of making himself notable so that he might one day be socially equal to his idol. Francesca’s simplicity and ease in Gersau had made her great in his eyes. Her father’s and mother’s rank alarmed him; the secrecy Princess Gandolphini had enjoined now seemed a proof of affection. By refusing to compromise the future, had she not confessed that she loved him?

At nine o’clock he took a carriage to Villa Jeanrenaud—Prince Gandolphini’s.

He saw Francesca without being seen. The Princess stood near the piano; her thick hair was bound with a golden fillet. Her face, in candlelight, had the pale brilliance of Italians, which looks best by artificial light. She wore full evening dress, revealing alluring shoulders, the figure of a girl and arms like an antique statue. Her beauty surpassed rivalry, though charming women of Geneva and Italians like Princess Varese and the singer Tinti were present.

Rodolphe, leaning against the door-post, fixed on her a tenacious, attracting gaze charged with desire, almost a command. Did that gaze reach her? Francesca, as if magnetized, glanced toward the door and met Rodolphe’s eyes. A slight thrill quivered through her superb face and body; she blushed. Rodolphe felt a whole life in that lightning exchange: he was loved. The lofty Princess, amid her world, kept the promise made in the disguised exile’s capricious lodging. The moment intoxicated him. A faint, refined smile curved Francesca’s lips; at a moment when she did not feel observed, she looked at Rodolphe with a look that seemed to ask his pardon for deceiving him about her rank.

After the song, Rodolphe was led to the Prince and presented to Princess and Prince Colonna and to Francesca. Later the Princess took part in the famous quartet Mi manca la voce, sung with Tinti, the tenor Genovese, and a well-known exiled Italian prince whose voice alone would have made him a prince of art.

“Take that seat,” said Francesca to Rodolphe, pointing to her chair. “Oime! I think there is some mistake in my name; I have for the last minute been Princess Rodolphini.”

She said it with the artless grace that revived, hidden beneath a jest, the happy days at Gersau. Rodolphe reveled in the sensation of listening to the woman he adored, sitting so close that the stuff of her dress nearly brushed his cheek and the gauze of her scarf. During Mi manca la voce, sung by some of Italy’s finest voices, tears came to his eyes.

In love, as in all else, trivial circumstances born of prior incidents can have immense importance: a small touch, a word, an unexpected proof of affection that epitomizes the past and links to the future. This recognition between Rodolphe and Francesca at the party, public yet intimate, was one of those intense moments that join future to past and rivet attachment. It was perhaps one of those incidental rivets Bossuet had in mind when he likened the rarity of happy moments to them.

Next to the pleasure of admiring the beloved comes that of seeing her admired by others. Rodolphe enjoyed both: her charm and the applause she drew. Love is a treasury of memories; his was already full, yet he added more—smiles meant only for him, stolen glances, tones in her singing that addressed him though they made Tinti pale with jealousy. All his desire and the special expression of his soul were thrown over the beautiful Roman, who became the beginning and end of his thoughts and actions. Rodolphe loved with a force and constancy that made Francesca the substance of his heart; he felt her blood mingle with his as purer blood, her soul as a more perfect soul; she underlay his every effort like golden sand beneath the Mediterranean waves. His lightest aspiration became a living hope.

After a few days Francesca understood this boundless love; it was natural and perfectly shared by her, not surprising. She was worthy of it.

“What is there that is strange?” she asked as they walked on the garden terrace, when he had been betrayed into French conceit in expressing his feelings. “What is extraordinary in your loving a young and beautiful woman, artist enough to earn her living like Tinti, and giving you some pleasures of vanity? Any lout might become an Amadis then. The point is that we both love faithfully, persistently; perhaps separated for years, with the sole satisfaction of knowing we are loved.”

“Alas!” said Rodolphe, “will you think my fidelity has no merit when you see me absorbed in devouring ambition? Do you imagine I want to see you exchange the fine name of Gandolphini for that of a nobody? I want to become one of the most remarkable men in my country, rich and great—so that you may be as proud of my name as of your Colonna.”

“I should be grieved to see you without such sentiments,” she replied with a bewitching smile. “But do not wear yourself out too soon in ambition. Remain young. Politics soon make a man old.”

One rare gift in women is a gaiety that does not lessen tenderness. This combination of deep feeling and youthful lightness added an enchanting grace to Francesca. This quality is the key to her character: she laughs and is touched; she grows enthusiastic and returns to arch raillery with a readiness that makes her charming and exquisite, a reputation known beyond Italy. Under her graces she concealed vast learning, a result of the monotonous, almost monastic life in the Colonnas’ castle.

This rich heiress had at first been intended for the cloister as the fourth child of Prince and Princess Colonna; but the deaths of her two brothers and elder sister brought her out of retirement and made her one of the Papal States’ most brilliant matches. Her elder sister had been betrothed to Prince Gandolphini; Francesca married him instead so the family’s position would not change—the Colonnas and Gandolphinis always intermarried.

From nine to sixteen, under a Cardinal’s direction, she read through the Colonnas’ library to temper her ardent imagination by studying science, art, and letters. From these studies she acquired a taste for independence and liberal ideas, which led her and her husband into the revolution’s ranks. Rodolphe had not yet learned that, besides five modern languages, Francesca knew Greek, Latin, and Hebrew. The charming creature understood that for a woman the first condition of being learned is to keep it deeply hidden.

Rodolphe spent the whole winter at Geneva; it passed like a day. When spring returned, despite the delights of society with a clever, young, lovely woman, the lover endured cruel sufferings, borne with courage but sometimes visible in his manner, perhaps because he believed Francesca shared them. It annoyed him that she kept calm. Like an Englishwoman, she seemed to pride herself on expressing nothing; her serenity defied love. He longed to see her agitated and accused her of having no feeling, dwelling on the tradition that Italian women are feverishly excitable.

“I am a Roman!” Francesca replied gravely when she took his banter seriously.

There was depth in her tone, a hint of irony that quickened his pulse. May spread its fresh verdure; the sun was sometimes as powerful as midsummer. The two lovers stood where the rock falls abruptly to the lake, leaning over a stone parapet above steps to a landing-stage. From a neighboring villa a boat shot out like a swan, its flag flaming, crimson awning over a lovely woman reclining on red cushions, her hair wreathed with real flowers; a young man dressed like a sailor rowed with graceful attention under her eye.

“They are happy!” exclaimed Rodolphe bitterly. “Claire de Bourgogne, the last of the only house that can rival the French royal family—”

“Oh! of a bastard branch, and that a female line.”

“At any rate, she is Vicomtesse de Beauseant; and she did not—”

“Did not hesitate, you would say, to bury herself here with Monsieur Gaston de Nueil, you would say,” Francesca cut in. “She is only a Frenchwoman; I am an Italian, my dear sir!”

She turned from the parapet, leaving Rodolphe chilled; he followed, suspecting he had wounded her soul, simple and wise, proud and humble. She signed him away, yet he did not heed and saw her wiping tears. Tears! in so strong a nature.

“Francesca,” he said, taking her hand, “is there a single regret in your heart?”

She was silent, freed her hand that held an embroidered handkerchief, and dried her eyes.

“Forgive me!” he cried, and, with a rush, kissed her eyes to wipe away the tears.

Francesca did not seem aware of his impulse; she was violently agitated. Rodolphe, thinking she consented, grew bolder; he put his arm round her, clasped her to his heart, and snatched a kiss. She freed herself with a dignified movement of offended modesty, and, standing a yard off, looked at him without anger but with firm resolve.

“Go this evening,” she said. “We meet no more till we meet at Naples.”

Her order was stern and it was obeyed, for it was Francesca’s will.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
On his return to Paris Rodolphe found in his rooms a portrait of Princess Gandolphini painted by Schinner. The artist passed through Geneva on his way to Italy. As he had refused to paint the portraits of several women, Rodolphe did not believe the Prince, though eager for a likeness of his wife, could overcome the great painter’s objections; but Francesca had bewitched him and obtained—a miracle—an original for Rodolphe and a duplicate for Emilio. She told him this in a charming letter in which the mind compensated for the reserve required by propriety. The lover replied. Thus began, never to cease, a regular correspondence between Rodolphe and Francesca, the sole indulgence they allowed themselves.

Rodolphe, possessed by an ambition sanctified by his love, set to work. First he longed to make his fortune and risked everything in an enterprise to which he devoted all his faculties and capital; but he, an inexperienced youth, had to contend with duplicity, which prevailed. Thus three years were lost in a vast undertaking, three years of struggling and courage.

The Villele ministry fell just when Rodolphe was ruined. The valiant lover thought to seek in politics what commerce had denied him; but before braving that career he went, wounded and sick at heart, to Naples to heal and regain courage, where the Prince and Princess had been reinstated on the King’s accession. In the midst of his warfare this was a delightful respite; he spent three months at the Villa Gandolphini, rocked in hope.

Rodolphe then began anew to build his fortune. His talents were already known; he was about to attain his ambitions; a high position was promised as the reward of his zeal, devotion, and past services, when the storm of July 1830 broke and again his bark was swamped.

She and God! These are the only witnesses of the brave efforts and daring attempts of a young man gifted with fine qualities but to whom, so far, the protection of luck—the god of fools—has been denied. This indefatigable wrestler, upheld by love, returns to fresh struggles, lighted on his way by an always friendly eye, an ever faithful heart.

Lovers! Pray for him!

* * * * *
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
As she finished the narrative, Mademoiselle de Watteville’s cheeks were on fire; there was a fever in her blood. She was crying—but with rage. This little novel, written in the fashionable literary style, was the first such reading Rosalie had ever devoured. Love was depicted in it, if not by a master-hand, at least by a man who seemed to give his own impressions; truth, even if unskilled, touched a virgin soul. Hence Rosalie’s terrible agitation, fever, and tears: she was jealous of Francesca Colonna.

She never doubted the sincerity of this poetical flight; Albert had taken pleasure in telling the story of his passion while changing names. Rosalie was possessed by curiosity. What woman would not want to know her rival’s name—when she too loved? While reading those pages, contagiously moved, she had solemnly told herself, “I love him!” She loved Albert and felt a gnawing desire to fight for him, to snatch him from this unknown rival. She reflected that she knew nothing of music and was not beautiful.

“He will never love me!” she thought.

That thought intensified her anxiety to know whether she might be mistaken—whether Albert really loved an Italian princess and was loved by her. That night the decisive faculty, which had characterized the famous Watteville, fully developed in Rosalie. She devised whimsical schemes that occur to young girls confined by strict mothers: descending a ladder from the kiosk into Albert’s garden; taking advantage of the lawyer being asleep to look through his window; writing to him; or bursting the fetters of Besancon society by bringing Albert into the drawing-room of the Hotel de Rupt. Even the Abbe de Grancey would have deemed such an enterprise impossible, yet it was a passing thought.

“Ah!” she said. “My father has a dispute about his land at les Rouxey. I will go there! If there is no lawsuit, I will make one, and he shall come into our drawing-room!” she cried, springing to the window to look at the gleam in Albert’s rooms. The clock struck one; he was still asleep.

“I shall see him when he gets up; perhaps he will come to his window.”

At that instant Rosalie saw an incident that promised means of discovering Albert’s secrets. By moonlight she saw a pair of arms stretched from the kiosk to help Jerome, Albert’s servant, over the coping into the little building. In Jerome’s accomplice she at once recognized Mariette, the lady’s-maid.

“Mariette and Jerome!” she thought. “Mariette, such an ugly girl! Certainly they must be ashamed.”

Though Mariette was ugly and thirty-six, she had inherited plots of land. She had been seventeen years with Madame de Watteville, who valued her for bigotry, honesty, and service. Earning about ten louis a year, she likely had saved and invested enough to have not less than ten thousand francs.

In Jerome’s eyes ten thousand francs altered the optics; he saw in Mariette a neat figure, invisible pox scars and all. Ever since Savaron had brought him near the Wattevilles, Jerome had courted the maid, who, prim and sanctimonious like her mistress, was far more exacting than the handsomest.

To Rosalie, though she could not so fully account for the night-scene, it gave the most dangerous lesson: a servant girl could undo a mother’s strict rearing in one hour. Rosalie returned to bed, considering how she might exploit her discovery.

Next morning, as she went to Mass accompanied by Mariette—her mother being unwell—Rosalie took the maid’s arm, surprising the country wench.

“Mariette,” she said, “is Jerome in his master’s confidence?”

“I do not know, mademoiselle.”

“Do not play the innocent,” said Rosalie dryly. “You let him kiss you last night under the kiosk; I no longer wonder you approved my mother’s improvement plans.”

Mariette trembled.

“I wish you no ill,” Rosalie went on. “Be easy; I shall not tell my mother, and you can meet Jerome as often as you please.”

“But, mademoiselle,” said Mariette, “it is respectable; Jerome means to marry me—”

“But then,” said Rosalie, “why meet at night?”

Mariette was dumfounded and made no reply.

“Listen, Mariette; I am in love too! In secret and without return. I am my parents’ only child. You have more to hope for from me than anyone else—”

“Certainly, mademoiselle, you may count on us for life or death,” Mariette exclaimed, rejoiced.

“In the first place, silence for silence,” said Rosalie. “I will not marry Monsieur de Soulas; but I must have your help on one condition.”

“What is that?”

“I must see the letters Monsieur Savaron sends by Jerome.”

“But what for?” Mariette asked.

“Oh! merely to read them; you shall post them afterwards. It will cause a little delay.”

They entered the church, each lost in thought.

“Dear, dear, how many sins are there in all that?” thought Mariette.

Rosalie, whose soul, brain, and heart were completely upset by the story, already regarded it as history written for her rival. Thinking of nothing else, she came to believe that the Eastern Review was forwarded to Albert’s lady-love.

“Oh!” she said, head buried in her hands; “how can I get my father to look through the list of people to whom the Review is sent?”

After breakfast she coaxed her father into the kiosk and urged him to see if the Review was read abroad.

“It is but just started—”

“Well, I will wager it is.”

“It is hardly possible.”

“Just go and find out, and note any subscribers out of France.”

Two hours later Monsieur de Watteville said to his daughter:

“I was right; there is not one foreign subscriber yet. They hope for some at Neufchatel, Berne, and Geneva. One copy, in fact, is sent to Italy, but it is not paid for—to a Milanese lady at her country house at Belgirate, on Lago Maggiore.”

“What is her name?”

“The Duchesse d’Argaiolo.”

“Do you know her, papa?”

“I have heard of her. She was born Princess Soderini, a Florentine, a very great lady, as rich as her husband, who has one of the largest fortunes in Lombardy. Their villa on the Lago Maggiore is one of Italy’s sights.”

Two days after, Mariette placed the following letter in Rosalie’s hand:

Albert Savaron to Leopold Hannequin.

“Yes, ’tis so, my dear friend; I am at Besancon, while you thought I was traveling. I would not tell you till success began, and now it is dawning. Yes, after so many abortive undertakings, wasted efforts, and a wasted three years, I have made up my mind to follow the beaten path—the longest but safest. I see you start in your lawyer’s chair!

But do not suppose anything is changed in my personal life, of which you alone know the secret, under the reservations she insists on. I was horribly weary of Paris. The outcome of my first enterprise, on which I had founded all my hopes, ended badly because of rascality among partners. I gave up the pursuit of a fortune after losing three years. One of these years was in the law courts; perhaps I should have fared worse if I had not studied law when I was twenty.

I determined to go into politics, so I might some day be named to the Senate under the title of Comte Albert Savaron de Savarus, and revive a good name extinct in Belgium—though I am neither legitimate nor legitimized.

You know how conscientiously I studied as an obscure journalist and faithful secretary to a statesman who was true to me in 1829. Thrown down by the revolution of July just when my name rose, I erred in remaining faithful to the fallen and fighting for them without them. Oh! why was I but thirty-three, and why did I not apply to you to make me eligible? I concealed my devotedness and dangers. We should not have agreed.

Ten months ago, though you saw me gay and contented, I was in despair; I foresaw my fate at thirty-seven with two thousand francs and no fame, having failed in founding a daily paper—an enterprise that could have been great. I wandered gloomy through Paris, thinking of my crushed ambitions, never giving them up. What frantic letters I wrote to her, my other self! Sometimes I asked, ‘Why demand everything? Why not wait for happiness while devoting myself to a mechanical employment?’

I looked for a modest appointment. I nearly became editor of a paper under a manager, but I took fright. Would she accept a man who had stooped so low? That thought made me young again. But how the soul is worn by these perplexities! What must the caged eagles suffer!

Seven months ago I resolved to make my name at the Paris Bar, seeing vacancies left by promotions. But remembering the rivalry in the press and difficulty in Paris, I decided to go to Besancon, where I might meet no opposition and canvass alone. The people of the Comte will not admit an outsider to drawing-rooms; the outsider will win the commercial class, which elects deputies. I will study commercial questions, win their suits, be the greatest pleader in Besancon, and start a Review to defend the country’s interests. By gaining votes I will reach the tribune. So I packed my books, sent furniture to Besancon, secured rooms, and set up a private room where the portrait of my divinity reigns. I engaged a servant and sat, like a hibernating marmot, for five months.

My name was entered on the lawyers’ list. I was called to defend an unhappy wretch at the Assizes; one influential merchant on the jury listened, and I saved my client, arrested the real criminals, and won public admiration. I fought a case for my merchant and won; the Cathedral Chapter chose me to defend a long action against the town—I won that too. After these trials I became the most famous advocate of Franche-Comte.

I bury my life in mystery and hide my aims. I accept no invitations, consult only between six and eight in the morning, go to bed after dinner, and work at night. The Vicar-General, a man of parts, entrusted the Chapter’s case to me. ‘Monsieur,’ I said, ‘I will win your suit, but I want no fee; I want more.’ I told him I was in Besancon to leave as deputy and would defend any priest’s case for nothing in return for secret votes when needed. He later gave me a note for five hundred francs, but the votes remained a bargain. I think I have made a friend in him.

Now I am overwhelmed with business, but I accept only commercial cases, which attach business men to me and let me make influential friends. In a few months I shall purchase a house to qualify for election; I count on you to lend me the capital. If I die or fail, the loss will be small. You will get interest from the rental.

My whole life is at stake; every day wears me out. If happiness does not crown me, I shall want to cease from living. Power and fame are secondary; they are means to happiness, the pedestal for my idol. To reach the goal and die, like antiquity’s runner! To win the beloved woman just when love is extinct! Many men have been so fated.

I play my last card in the game of ambition. If anything thwarts my plan—if after stooping to provincial life and fighting for votes I fail—I shall rebel. There are days when deep disgust surges up, especially when I dream of the joys of love. At present my life is fair, illuminated by faith, work, and love.

Farewell, my friend; I send love to your children.—Yours, ALBERT.”

Rosalie read the letter twice, and its purport was stamped on her heart. She suddenly saw all of Albert’s previous existence; her quick intelligence illuminated details. By adding this information to the little novel in the Review, she fully understood Albert. She exaggerated the greatness of his soul and will, and her love became a passion, strengthened by youth, solitude, and the unspent force of her character. Love in a young girl is natural law; when centered in an exceptional man, it mixes with enthusiasm. Mademoiselle de Watteville, in days, reached a morbid, dangerous stage of infatuation. The Baroness was pleased; Rosalie, under the spell of absorbing thoughts, never resisted her mother, seemed devoted to feminine occupations, and realized her mother’s ideal of a docile daughter.

The lawyer was now engaged in Court several times a week. Though overwhelmed with business, he attended trials, called on merchants, and conducted the Review, keeping his personal mystery, convinced that covert influence is more real. He neglected no means of success, reading the list of Besancon electors, learning their interests, characters, friendships, and antipathies. Did ever a Cardinal hope to be Pope with more toil?

One evening Mariette, dressing Rosalie for a party, handed her—after many groans—a letter whose address made Rosalie shiver:

To Madame la Duchesse d’Argaiolo (née Princesse Soderini) At Belgirate, Lago Maggiore, Italy.

The direction blazed in her eyes like Mene, Tekel, Upharsin. After concealing the letter, Rosalie accompanied her mother to Madame de Chavoncourt’s; during the evening she was tormented by remorse. She had violated the secrecy of Albert’s letter to Leopold; she asked whether, if he knew her crime—infamous because unpunished—the high-minded Albert could esteem her. Conscience answered “No.”

She imposed penances: fasting, mortifying herself on her knees, arms outstretched for hours, repeating prayers. She compelled Mariette to similar repentance; her passion mingled with asceticism and was thus more dangerous.

“Shall I read that letter, shall I not?” she asked while listening to the Chavoncourt girls. She viewed her two friends as children because they were not secretly in love. After an hour’s hesitation she decided: “If I read it, it shall be the last. Since I have seen what he wrote to his friend, why not know what he says to her? If it is a horrible crime, is it not a proof of love? Oh, Albert! am I not your wife?”

When in bed she opened the letter, dated day by day, to give the Duchess a faithful picture of Albert’s life and feelings.

25th.

“My dear Soul, all is well. I have just done a service for one of the most influential men who work elections. He wanted to show gratitude without loosening his purse by saying, ‘Would you care to sit in the Chamber? I can get you returned as deputy.’

‘If I ever enter politics,’ I replied, ‘it would be to devote myself to the Comte, which I love, and where I am appreciated.’

And so, my beloved angel, say what you will, my perseverance will be rewarded. Ere long from the French Tribune I shall come before my country, before Europe. My name will be flung at you by a hundred voices of the French press. Besancon has aged me; but like Sixtus V. I shall be young again after my election. I shall enter on my true life. Shall we not then stand in the same line? Count Savaron de Savarus may surely marry a Princess Soderini, the widow of the Duc d’Argaiolo! Triumph restores youth.”

26th.

“We have entered the twelfth year since that blessed evening when, by a look, the beautiful Duchess sealed the promises made by the exile Francesca. You, dear, are thirty-two, I thirty-five; the dear Duke is seventy-seven. My patience is almost as great as my love. I am in good spirits to-day; hope makes me laugh. Sadness or gladness, all comes through you. The hope of success always carries me back to the day I first saw you, when my life became one with yours.”

27th.

“No, dearest, do not go to Milan; stay at Belgirate. Milan terrifies me. Solitude preserves a woman’s purity.”

28th.

“Is your statue never to be finished? I wish to have you in marble, painting, miniature—to beguile my impatience. I still wait for the view of Belgirate from the south and of the balcony. I am so busy that to-day I can only write nothing—but that nothing is everything. Was it not of nothing that God made the world? That nothing is God’s word: I love you!”

30th.

“Ah! I have received your journal. So you found pleasure in seeing our first acquaintance set down? We had no stories, and a Review without stories is a beauty without hair. Not inventive by nature, I took the only poetry in my soul and pitched it in a key to bear telling; I never ceased to think of you while writing. Did not the transformation of your fierce Sormano into Gina make you laugh?

My health is better than in Paris. Though I work enormously, the peaceful surroundings soothe me. What ages me is mortified vanity, the friction of Paris. Your letter gives me immense pleasure: the pattern of your new dress, your boating—trifles that delight me. I read the books you read. Your letters have upheld me like a light and perfume for eleven years.

Do not fail me! The day before they are due I suffer anxiety. O mia cara diva, keep up your music. The first time I pleaded here I fancied you were listening; inspiration flashed. If I am returned to the Chamber—oh! you must come to Paris for my first appearance!”

30th, Evening.

“How I love you! I have intrusted too much to hope. For three years I have not seen you; my heart beats at the thought of Belgirate. To see you, hear your voice, embrace that ivory skin, admire your fingers on the keys—these are life. What folly to run after power! But at Belgirate there is everything: poetry, glory. I ought to have been your steward, or cavaliere servente, but our passion was too fierce.

Farewell, my angel, forgive this fit of sadness; hope has sent a beam of light.”

“How he loves her!” cried Rosalie, dropping the letter, which seemed heavy. “After eleven years to write like this!”

“Mariette,” Rosalie said next morning, “go and post this letter. Tell Jerome I know all I wish to know, and that he is to serve Monsieur Albert faithfully. We will confess our sins, you and I, without saying whose letters they were or to whom they went. I was wrong; I alone am guilty.”

“Mademoiselle has been crying?” asked Mariette.

“Yes, but I do not want my mother to notice; give me some very cold water.”

Amid the storms of passion Rosalie often listened to conscience. Touched by the fidelity of these two hearts, she resolved to be resigned and respect the happiness of two worthy beings, submitting to fate without criminal acts or wishes. She felt better and imagined herself sacrificing for him.

“She does not know how to love,” she thought. “Ah! if it were I—I would give up everything to a man who loved me so.—To be loved!—When, and by whom, shall I be loved? That little Monsieur de Soulas loves my money; if I were poor, he would not look at me.”

“Rosalie, my child, what are you thinking about? You are working beyond the outline,” said the Baroness, as Rosalie made worsted slippers for the Baron.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Rosalie spent the winter of 1834–35 torn by secret tumults; but in April, when she turned nineteen, she sometimes thought how fine it would be to triumph over a Duchesse d’Argaiolo. In solitude the prospect of this struggle fanned her passion and dark thoughts. She fed her romantic daring with one plan after another. Such Rosalies are rare but not unique; this story contains a moral that ought to warn them.

During that winter Albert de Savarus quietly advanced in Besançon. Confident of success, he impatiently awaited the dissolution of the Chamber. Among the moderates he had gained the support of a powerful local contractor.

Wherever they settled, the Romans took immense pains and spent enormous sums to secure good water supplies. At Besançon they drank water from Arcier, a hill some distance away. Restoring an aqueduct to drink the same water the Romans had drunk—while the town lay in a horseshoe of the Doubs—was one of those absurdities that only succeed in a place governed by exemplary gravity. If the whim took hold, it would require considerable outlay, from which the influential contractor would profit.

Albert de Savarus held that the river water was fit only to flow under the suspension bridge and that Arcier’s water alone was drinkable. Articles in the Review expressed the commercial interests of Besançon. Nobility and citizens, moderates and legitimists, government and opposition alike agreed they must drink the Roman water and boast a suspension bridge. The Arcier water question dominated Besançon. As with the two proposed railways to Versailles and other local abuses, unconfessed private interests energized the idea. Those few who opposed it were dismissed as old women. No one spoke of anything but Savarus’s two projects. After eighteen months of underground work, the ambitious lawyer had stirred the most stagnant town, exerting preponderant influence without leaving his room. He had solved how to be powerful without being popular.

That winter he won seven lawsuits for Besançon priests. Sometimes he could breathe freely at the thought of his coming triumph. This intense desire, which made him weave many interests and springs, absorbed the last strength of his overstrained soul. His disinterestedness was lauded; he took his clients’ fees without comment. But this disinterestedness was moral usury; he counted on a reward far greater than money.

In October 1834 he had, ostensibly to serve a merchant in difficulty and with money lent by Léopold Hannequin, taken a house that qualified him for election. He had not seemed to seek this advantageous bargain.

“You are really a remarkable man,” said the Abbé de Grancey, who had watched and understood him. The Vicar-General came to introduce a canon needing counsel. “You are a priest who has taken the wrong turning.” The remark struck Savarus.

Rosalie, meanwhile, had resolved to get Monsieur de Savarus into the drawing room of the Hôtel de Rupt and acquainted with its society. So far she had limited her desire to seeing and hearing Albert. She had compounded—a truce, as it were.

Les Rouxey, inherited by the Wattevilles, yielded only ten thousand francs a year but could have produced far more. The Baron, indifferent and leaving management to a factotum, Modinier, went there with his wife when they left town. The château and park were the work of the famous Watteville, who in his old age had passionately loved the spot.

Between two precipitous hills, the great and the little Rouxey, in a ravine where torrents from the Dent de Vilard tumbled to join the upper Doubs, Watteville had built a huge dam with two overflow cuttings. Above it he made a beautiful lake; below, two cascades united to form a river to irrigate the valley. He enclosed the hills and built a retreat on the dam, widened by soil removed to make channels.

When the Baron obtained the lake he owned the two hills but not the upper valley flooded by the dam, where a right-of-way had always existed to the horseshoe under the Dent de Vilard. Watteville was so feared that no claim was asserted while he lived. When he died he left the slopes joined by a strong wall to protect lateral valleys, thus controlling the Dent de Vilard. His heirs asserted protectorate over the village of Riceys and maintained the usurpation. The old abbé ended his career by planting trees and making a fine road over a Rouxey shoulder. The estate remained extensive but ill-cultivated, wild and deserted, yet full of sublime, unexpected beauty.

It is unnecessary to recite all Rosalie’s prodigious trouble and resourceful inventiveness by which she achieved her end without suspicion. It suffices that, obeying her mother, she left Besançon in May 1835 in an antique carriage with hired horses and accompanied her father to les Rouxey.

To a young girl love lurks everywhere. Morning after arrival, Rosalie looked from her bedroom and saw the water’s expanse, with mists caught in firs and larches rolling up the hills; she cried out with admiration.

“They loved by the lakes! She lives by a lake! A lake is full of love!” she thought.

A snow-fed lake has opalescent translucency; when shut between two granite masses covered with pines and a brooding silence, everyone must exclaim, as Rosalie did.

“We owe that,” said her father, “to the notorious Watteville.”

“On my word,” said the girl, “he did his best to earn forgiveness. Let us go in a boat to the further end; it will give us an appetite for breakfast.”

The Baron called two gardener lads who could row and took Modinier. The lake, about six acres across in places and four hundred in length, brought them to the upper end below the Dent de Vilard.

“Here we are, Monsieur le Baron,” said Modinier, signing to tie the boat. “Will you come and look?”

“Look at what?” asked Rosalie.

“Oh, nothing!” said the Baron. “But you are sensible; we have some little secrets. Some difficulties have arisen since 1830 between Riceys and me about this Dent de Vilard, and I want to settle the matter without your mother knowing, for she is stubborn; she might fling fire and flames, particularly if she heard the mayor of Riceys—a republican—got up this action as a sop to his people.”

Rosalie masked her delight to work more effectively on her father.

“What action?” she asked.

“Mademoiselle, the people of Riceys,” Modinier said, “have long grazed and cut fodder on their side of the Dent. Now Monsieur Chantonnit, the maire since 1830, declares the Dent belongs to his district, claiming there was formerly a way through our grounds. If so, we should no longer have them to ourselves. The old men say the ground occupied by the lake was appropriated by the Abbé de Watteville. That would be the end of les Rouxey.”

“Indeed, my child,” said Monsieur de Watteville frankly. “The land is an usurpation, with no title-deed but lapse of time. To avoid worry, I wish to come to a friendly understanding about the border on our side and then raise a wall.”

“If you give way to the municipality, it will swallow you up. You ought to have threatened Riceys.”

“That is what I told the master,” said Modinier. “But I proposed he should come to see whether, on this side or the other, there may be traces of an enclosure.”

For a century the Dent de Vilard had been used by both parties without extremities; it stood as a party wall between the communes, yielding little profit since it was snow-covered six months a year. The revolution of 1830, however, had stirred the people. Chantonnit, a native of Neuchâtel, hoped to dramatize his mayoralty by stirring the affair.

“My dear father,” said Rosalie as they reembarked, “I agree with Modinier. If you wish joint possession, act decisively and get a legal opinion to protect you against Chantonnit. Why be afraid? Get the famous lawyer Savaron—engage him at once, lest Chantonnit place the village’s interests in his hands. The man who won the Chapter’s case can certainly win Watteville versus Riceys! Besides, les Rouxey will some day be mine—well, not yet. Don’t leave me with a lawsuit. I like this place; I shall often live here and add to it. On those banks I shall cut flowerbeds and make the loveliest English gardens. Let us go to Besançon and bring back Abbé de Grancey, Monsieur Savaron, and my mother, if she cares. But in your place I should have decided already. Your name is Watteville, and you are afraid of a fight! If you should lose—I will never reproach you!”

“Oh, if that is the way you take it,” said the Baron, “I am quite ready; I will see the lawyer.”

“A lawsuit is great fun. It brings interest into life, with coming and going, raging over it. You will have much to do before holding the judges. We did not see the Abbé de Grancey for three weeks—he was so busy!”

“But the very existence of the Chapter was involved,” said Monsieur de Watteville; “and then the Archbishop’s pride, his conscience, everything that makes up the priesthood was at stake. That Savaron does not know what he did for the Chapter! He saved it!”

“Listen,” Rosalie whispered to her father, “if you secure Monsieur de Savaron, you will gain your suit, won’t you? You cannot get him except through Monsieur de Grancey. Let us talk to the Abbé without my mother, for I know a way to persuade him to bring the lawyer.”

“It will be difficult to avoid telling your mother!”

“The Abbé de Grancey will settle that afterwards. But promise your vote to Monsieur Savaron at the next election, and you’ll see!”

“Go to the election! take the oath?” cried the Baron.

“What then!” she answered.

“And what will your mother say?”

“She may even desire you to do it,” Rosalie replied, knowing from Albert’s letter to Léopold how deeply the Vicar-General had pledged him.

Four days later the Abbé de Grancey called early on Albert de Savarus, having announced his visit. The old priest had come to win the great lawyer to the Wattevilles, showing how much tact and subtlety Rosalie must have used.

“What can I do for you, Monsieur le Vicaire-Général?” asked Savarus.

The Abbé told his story with frankness; Albert listened coldly.

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” said he, “I cannot defend the Wattevilles. My part is to remain perfectly neutral. I must remain a mystery till the eve of my election. To plead for the Wattevilles would mean nothing in Paris, but here, where everything is discussed, I should be supposed to be an ally of your Faubourg Saint-Germain.”

“What! do you suppose you can remain unknown at the election, when candidates oppose each other? On the day the candidates are known, it will be known that you are Savaron de Savarus, Master of Appeals, a man of the Restoration!”

“On the day of the election,” said Savarus, “I will be all I am expected to be; and I intend to speak at the preliminary meetings.”

“If you have the support of Monsieur de Watteville and his party, you will get a mass of a hundred votes, far more reliable than those you now count on. It is always possible to divide interests; convictions are inseparable.”

“The deuce is in it!” said Savarus. “I am attached to you and could do much, Father! Perhaps we may compound with the Devil. Whatever Monsieur de Watteville’s business, by engaging Girardet and prompting him, it will be possible to drag proceedings out till the elections are over. I will not plead till the day after I am returned.”

“But there are questions requiring inspection of the localities,” said the Vicar-General.

“Girardet can go,” said Savarus. “I cannot risk anything in a town I know so well which might compromise the supreme interests that lie beyond my election.”

The Abbé left after giving him a keen look, seeming to laugh at the young man’s uncompromising politics while admiring his firmness.

“Ah! I would have dragged my father into a lawsuit—I would have done anything to get him here!” cried Rosalie to herself, standing in the kiosk and looking at the lawyer’s window the day after Albert’s interview, which the Abbé had reported to her father. “I would have committed any mortal sin, and you will not enter the Wattevilles’ drawing room; I may not hear your fine voice! You make conditions when your help is required by the Wattevilles and the Rupts! Well, God knows I meant to be content with small joys: seeing you, hearing you speak, going with you to les Rouxey so your presence might make the place sacred. That was all I asked. But now I mean to be your wife. Yes, look at her portrait, her drawing room, her bedroom, the four sides of her villa, the points of view from her gardens. You expect her statue? I will make her marble herself towards you! After all, the woman does not love. Art, science, books, singing, music have absorbed half her senses and intelligence. She is old—past thirty; my Albert will not be happy!”

“What is the matter that you stay here, Rosalie?” asked her mother, interrupting. “Monsieur de Soulas is in the drawing room and observed your attitude, which betrays more thoughtfulness than is due at your age.”

“Then, is Monsieur de Soulas a foe to thought?” asked Rosalie.

“It is time you knew our intentions. Amédée likes you and you will not be unhappy as Comtesse de Soulas.”

Rosalie, as white as a lily, made no reply, stupefied by contending feelings. In the presence of the man she had begun to hate, she forced the smile of a ballet dancer. She even laughed; she had the strength to conceal her rage, which subsided because she resolved to use this fat simpleton to further her designs.

“Monsieur Amédée,” she said, as her mother affected to leave them together, “were you not aware that Monsieur Albert Savaron de Savarus is a Legitimist?”

“A Legitimist?”

“Until 1830 he was Master of Appeals to the Council of State, attached to the supreme Ministerial Council, and in favor with the Dauphin and Dauphiness. It would be good of you to say nothing against him, but better if you attend the election this year, carry the day, and hinder Monsieur de Chavoncourt from representing Besançon.”

“What sudden interest have you in this Savaron?”

“Monsieur Albert, the natural son of the Comte de Savarus—pray keep secret—if returned will be our advocate in the Rouxey suit. Les Rouxey will be my property; I intend to live there. I should be broken-hearted to see that fine work destroyed.”

“The devil!” thought Amédée as he left. “The heiress is not such a fool as her mother thinks.”

Monsieur de Chavoncourt is a Royalist of the famous 221. After July he preached taking the oaths and resisting the present order, like Tories against Whigs. This doctrine was not acceptable to all Legitimists, who, defeated, trusted inertia and Providence. De Chavoncourt was not wholly trusted by his party but seemed the best choice to Moderates; they preferred his half-hearted opinions to a Republican who might combine enthusiast and patriot votes. High in Besançon, his fortune of about fifteen thousand a year was not offensive. Electors adore the beau ideal of parliamentary virtue.

Madame de Chavoncourt, forty and once a beauty, economized in the country while the Chamber sat. In winter she received creditably once a week. Young Chavoncourt, twenty-two, and another friend, Monsieur de Vauchelles, no richer than Amédée and his school friend, were intimate allies. They went together to Granvelle and shooting, inseparable and always invited together.

Rosalie, intimate with the Chavoncourt girls, knew the three young men shared confidences. She reflected that if Monsieur de Soulas repeated her words, it would reach his two companions. Monsieur de Vauchelles wished to marry Victoire, the eldest Chavoncourt, on whom an old aunt would settle an estate of seven thousand a year and a hundred thousand francs. Thus Chavoncourt and Vauchelles would warn Monsieur de Chavoncourt of Albert’s candidacy.

But this did not satisfy Rosalie. She wrote the préfet a letter with her left hand, signed “A friend to Louis-Philippe,” informing him of Savarus’s secret intentions and the support a Royalist orator might lend Berryer, revealing the lawyer’s artful course in Besançon. The préfet, a capable man and enemy of the Royalist party devoted to the July government, read the letter and burned it.

Rosalie aimed to prevent Albert’s election, to keep him five years longer in Besançon.

Elections were party fights; the Ministry chose its ground and moment. The three months before voting hang heavy when a man’s life depends on an election. Rosalie understood how much latitude Albert’s absorbed state would give her during those months. By promising Mariette to take both her and Jérôme into her service, she induced the maid to bring her all letters Albert sent to Italy and those addressed to him from there. All the while she pondered machinations, yet worked slippers for her father with an air of innocence—because candor would serve her ends.

“My daughter grows quite charming!” said Madame de Watteville.

Two months before the election a meeting at Monsieur Boucher senior’s included the contractor expecting the aqueduct work, Boucher’s father-in-law, Monsieur Granet who Savarus had aided, Girardet the lawyer, the Review’s printer, and the Chamber of Commerce president—twenty-seven provincial bigwigs in all. Each claimed influence; one was devoted to the préfet, a false brother hoping for ministerial favor.

At this preliminary meeting it was agreed to name Savaron the candidate, a decision greeted with unexpected enthusiasm. Albert, waiting for Alfred Boucher, chatted with Abbé de Grancey, who had become his political guide. The Chapter disliked de Chavoncourt, whose wife’s brother-in-law as President of the Tribunal had lost their famous suit in lower court.

“You are betrayed, my dear fellow,” the Abbé said in a gentle, calm voice.

“Betrayed!” cried the lover, struck.

“By whom I know not,” the priest replied. “But at the Prefecture your plans are known. I have no advice to give today. Such affairs need thought. For tonight, take the bull by the horns—tell them your past and thus soften the discovery’s effect.”

“Oh, I was prepared,” said Albert.

“You would have benefited from my advice; you could have made an impression at the Hôtel de Rupt—”

“What?”

“The unanimous support of the Royalists, immediate readiness to go to the election—above a hundred votes. Add the ecclesiastical vote and you would have commanded the ballots. Under such circumstances, a man may temporize and make his way.”

Alfred Boucher arrived, full of enthusiasm, to announce the meeting’s decision, finding the Abbé and Albert cold, calm, and grave.

“Good-night, Monsieur l’Abbé,” said Albert. “We will talk of your business when the elections are over.”

He took Alfred’s arm after pressing the Abbé’s hand. The priest looked at him as if at a general who heard the first gun; he raised his eyes to heaven and left, saying to himself, “What a priest he would make!”

Eloquence is not usually found at the bar or pulpit; it bursts at the Chamber when an ambitious man stakes all or, stung, must speak. Feeling the need for supporters, Albert displayed all his faculties. He entered gravely and without dismay before the twenty or thirty men. Before Monsieur Boucher could speak, Albert asked for silence and warned him with a sign of an unexpected danger.

“My young friend, Alfred Boucher, has done me an honor. But before your decision is irrevocable,” he said, “I ought to explain who and what your candidate is, so you may withdraw if my declaration disturbs your conscience.”

The silence that followed seemed to some a noble impulse. Albert sketched his career, gave his real name, his action under the Restoration, revealed he was a new man in Besançon, and pledged himself for the future. He argued that a statesman born to govern is better than a mere voting machine; what a glory to have found a Mirabeau in Provence! His eloquence spellbound the men, each seeing in him a potential great minister and imagining themselves profiting from his influence. The address, judged by one capable observer (now a leading man of Besançon), was a masterpiece of skill and feeling. The whirlwind carried the electors; if votes had been taken then, Albert would have prevailed. But speech wins immediate effect; reflection kills it when the spell fades. He had to conquer anew each day for two months.

Albert went home quivering. The townsfolk had applauded, and he had silenced pre-emptively the malignant talk about his early career. The commercial interest had nominated Albert Savaron de Savarus.

Alfred Boucher’s initial enthusiasm became clumsy. The préfet, alarmed, counted ministerial votes and contrived a secret interview with Monsieur de Chavoncourt to build a coalition. Every day the Boucher committee’s voters diminished without Albert’s knowing how.

Nothing could resist the slow grinding of the Prefecture. Some men told Albert’s clients, “Will the deputy defend you and win your suits? Will he give advice, draw contracts, arrange compromises? He will be your slave for five years if you return him now; if you hold him out for five years hence, you keep him.” This calculus hurt Savarus, also because some merchants’ wives were swayed. The interests behind the bridge and Arcier water could not resist a Ministerialist’s convincing talk. Each day was a check, though Albert fought daily with speeches and proceedings. He dared not see the Abbé, and the Abbé remained invisible. Albert rose and went to bed in a fever, his brain on fire.

At last the day of the first struggle—the show of hands—arrived. Votes are counted; clever men can predict outcomes. The Radical party named a candidate; De Chavoncourt appeared; Albert was accused by his committee and the Radicals of being an uncompromising man of the Right, a second Berryer. The Ministry’s candidate was a stalking-horse to gather purely ministerial votes. Divided, the votes yielded no result: the Republican had twenty, the Ministry fifty, Albert seventy, De Chavoncourt sixty-seven. But the Prefecture’s party had perfidiously made thirty devoted adherents vote for Albert to deceive the enemy. De Chavoncourt’s votes plus the Prefecture’s eighty would carry the election if the Prefect could lure a few Radicals. A hundred and sixty votes were not recorded: those of the Abbé’s following and the Legitimists.

The show of hands is deceptive, like a dress rehearsal. Albert came home putting a brave face on it, but half dead. He had, within a fortnight, won two staunch supporters—Girardet’s father-in-law and a shrewd merchant whom the Abbé had sent. These men, his self-appointed spies, pretended to oppose him in the hostile camp and then told him toward the end of the show that thirty voters unknown were working against him in his party, playing the same trick the Prefecture played on the other side.

A criminal marching to execution could not have suffered as Albert did coming home. He walked the streets alone between eleven and midnight. At one in the morning, sleepless for days, he sat in his library pale, hands limp, in a forlorn attitude. Tears hung on his lashes—tears that dim the eyes but did not fall. Fierce thought drank them up; the fire of the soul consumed them. Alone, he might weep. Under the kiosk he saw a white figure that reminded him of Francesca.

“And for three months I have had no letter from her! What has become of her? I have not written for two months, but I warned her. Is she ill? Oh, my love! My life! Will you ever know what I have gone through? What a wretched constitution is mine! Have I an aneurism?” he asked, feeling his heart thunder.

Three distinct taps sounded. Albert hurried to the door and almost fainted at seeing the Abbé de Grancey’s cheerful, triumphant mien. He threw his arms about the Abbé, clung and let his head fall on the old man’s shoulder. He betrayed his weakness to no one but this priest, on whose face hope shone.

“Forgive me, dear Abbé, but you come at one of those moments when the man vanishes, for you are not to think me vulgarly ambitious.”

“Oh! I know,” replied the Abbé. “You wrote ‘Ambition for love’s sake!’—Ah, my son, I was made a priest in 1786 through love in despair. I have refused three bishoprics; I mean to die at Besançon.”

“Come and see her!” cried Savarus, seizing a candle and leading the Abbé into the handsome room to show the portrait of the Duchesse d’Argaiolo, which he lighted.

“She is one of those women born to reign!” said the Abbé. “But there is pride on that brow; it is implacable; she would never forgive an insult. It is the Archangel Michael, the angel of Execution—‘All or nothing’ is the motto of that head. There is something divinely pitiless in it.”

“You have guessed well,” cried Savarus. “For more than twelve years she has reigned over my life, and I have no thought to blame myself for—”

“Ah, if you could only say the same of God!” said the priest simply. “Now, to your affairs. For ten days I have been at work. If you are a real politician, follow my advice. You would not be where you are if you had gone to the Wattevilles when I first told you. But you must go tomorrow; I will take you in the evening. The Rouxey estates are in danger; the case must be defended within three days. The election will not be over in three days. They will take care not to appoint examiners the first day. There will be several voting days, and you may be elected by ballot—”

“How can that be?” asked Savarus.

“By winning the Rouxey lawsuit you will gain eighty Legitimist votes; add the thirty I can command and you have a hundred and ten. Then, as twenty remain to you from the Boucher committee, you will have a hundred and thirty.”

“Well,” said Albert, “we must get seventy-five more.”

“Yes,” said the priest, “since the rest are Ministerial. But, my son, you have two hundred votes and the Prefecture no more than a hundred and eighty.”

“I have two hundred votes?” said Albert, astonished.

“You have those of Monsieur de Chavoncourt,” said the Abbé.

“How?”

“You will marry Mademoiselle Sidonie de Chavoncourt.”

“Never!”

“You will marry Mademoiselle Sidonie de Chavoncourt,” the priest repeated.

But this time Albert understood: the Abbé would not be implicated in a scheme that at last favored the despairing politician. A word more would compromise the priest’s dignity.

“Tomorrow evening at the Hôtel de Rupt you will meet Madame de Chavoncourt and her second daughter. You can thank her beforehand for what she is going to do and tell her your gratitude is unbounded, that you are hers body and soul, that your future is that of her family. You are quite disinterested, for you have so much confidence in yourself that you regard the nomination as deputy as fortune enough.

“You will have a struggle with Madame de Chavoncourt; she will want your pledge. All your future lies in that evening. But understand, I have nothing to do with it. We are nothing, we have done nothing. If known to meddle in elections, we should be eaten alive by the Puritans of the Left—who do worse—and blamed by some of our own who want everything. Madame de Chavoncourt suspects nothing of my share. I have confided in no one but Madame de Watteville, whom we may trust as ourselves.”

“I will bring the Duchess to you to be blessed!” cried Savarus.

After seeing out the Abbé, Albert went to bed swaddled in the dreams of power.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Next evening, by nine o’clock Madame la Baronne de Watteville’s rooms were crowded by the aristocracy of Besancon assembled. They debated the step of going to the poll to oblige the daughter of the Rupts. It was known that the former Master of Appeals, secretary to one of the Elder Branch’s most faithful ministers, was to be presented that evening. Madame de Chavoncourt was there with her second daughter Sidonie, exquisitely dressed; her elder sister, secure of her lover, had not indulged in any toilette arts. In country towns such things are remarked. The Abbe de Grancey moved from group to group, listening as if apart, yet uttering incisive phrases that summed up questions and directed the issue.

“If the Elder Branch were to return,” he said to an old statesman of seventy, “what politicians would they find?”—“Berryer, alone on his bench, does not know which way to turn; if he had sixty votes, he would often scotch the wheels of the Government and upset Ministries!”—“The Duc de Fitz-James is to be nominated at Toulouse.” —“You will enable Monsieur de Watteville to win his lawsuit.” —“If you vote for Monsieur Savarus, the Republicans will vote with you rather than with the Moderates!” etc.

At nine o’clock Albert had not arrived. Madame de Watteville regarded the delay as an impertinence.

“My dear Baroness,” said Madame de Chavoncourt, “do not let such serious issues turn on such a trifle. The varnish on his boots is not dry—or a consultation, perhaps, detains Monsieur de Savarus.”

Rosalie shot a glance at Madame de Chavoncourt.

“She is very lenient to Monsieur de Savarus,” she whispered to her mother.

“You see,” said the Baroness with a smile, “there is a question of a marriage between Sidonie and Monsieur de Savarus.”

Mademoiselle de Watteville hastily went to a window overlooking the garden.

At ten o’clock Albert de Savarus had not appeared. The storm burst. Some gentlemen sat down to cards, finding the thing intolerable. The Abbe de Grancey, who did not know what to think, went to the window where Rosalie was hidden, and exclaimed aloud in his amazement, “He must be dead!”

The Vicar-General stepped into the garden, followed by Monsieur de Watteville and his daughter, and the three went up to the kiosk. In Albert’s rooms all was dark; not a light was to be seen.

“Jerome!” cried Rosalie, seeing the servant below. The Abbe looked at her with astonishment. “Where in the world is your master?” she asked the man, who came to the foot of the wall.

“Gone—in a post-chaise, mademoiselle.”

“He is ruined!” exclaimed the Abbe de Grancey, “or he is happy!”

Rosalie’s triumph was not so well concealed that the Vicar-General failed to detect it. He affected to see nothing.

“What can this girl have had to do with this business?” he asked himself.

They all three returned to the drawing-room, where Monsieur de Watteville announced the strange, the extraordinary, the prodigious news of the lawyer’s departure, without any reason assigned for his evasion. By half-past eleven only fifteen persons remained, among them Madame de Chavoncourt and the Abbe de Godenars, another Vicar-General, a man of about forty who hoped for a bishopric, the two Chavoncourt girls, and Monsieur de Vauchelles, the Abbe de Grancey, Rosalie, Amedee de Soulas, and a retired magistrate, one of the most influential members of the upper circle of Besancon, who had been very eager for Albert’s election. The Abbe de Grancey sat down by the Baroness in such a position as to watch Rosalie, whose face, usually pale, wore a feverish flush.

“What can have happened to Monsieur de Savarus?” said Madame de Chavoncourt.

At this moment a servant in livery brought in a letter for the Abbe de Grancey on a silver tray.

“Pray read it,” said the Baroness.

The Vicar-General read the letter; he saw Rosalie suddenly turn as white as her kerchief.

“She recognizes the writing,” he thought after glancing at the girl over his spectacles. He folded the letter and calmly put it in his pocket without a word. In three minutes he had met three glances from Rosalie which were enough to make him guess everything.

“She is in love with Albert Savarus!” thought the Vicar-General.

He rose and took leave. He was going towards the door when, in the next room, he was overtaken by Rosalie, who said:

“Monsieur de Grancey, it was from Albert!”

“How do you know that it was his writing, to recognize it from so far?”

The girl’s reply, caught as she was in the toils of her impatience and rage, seemed to the Abbe sublime.

“I love him!--What is the matter?” she said after a pause.

“He gives up the election.”

Rosalie put her finger to her lip.

“I ask you to be as secret as if it were a confession,” said she before returning to the drawing-room. “If there is an end of the election, there is an end of the marriage with Sidonie.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
In the morning, on her way to Mass, Mademoiselle de Watteville learned from Mariette some of the circumstances that had prompted Albert’s disappearance at the most critical moment of his life.

“An old gentleman from Paris arrived yesterday morning at the Hotel National,” Mariette said. “He came in his own carriage with four horses, a courier in front, and a servant. Jerome, who saw the carriage returning, declares he could only be a prince or a milord.”

“Was there a coronet on the carriage?” asked Rosalie.

“I do not know,” Mariette answered. “Just as two was striking he came to call on Monsieur Savaron and sent in his card; when he saw it, Jerome says Monsieur turned as pale as a sheet and told him to be shown in. They were together more than an hour. Jerome saw the servant go out again with an immense package, four feet long, like a painting on canvas. The old gentleman had a large parcel of papers. Monsieur Savaron was paler than death, and yet treated the old gentleman with the utmost respect. Jerome and Monsieur Albert Savaron escorted him to his carriage. The courier started at three.

“Monsieur Savaron went straight to the Prefecture, then to Monsieur Gentillet, who sold him the old traveling carriage that belonged to Madame de Saint-Vier; he ordered post horses for six o’clock. He went home to pack; no doubt he wrote many letters; he settled everything with Monsieur Girardet, who stayed till seven. Jerome carried a note to Monsieur Boucher, with whom his master was to have dined; at half-past seven the lawyer set out, leaving Jerome with three months’ wages and telling him to find another place.

“He left his keys with Monsieur Girardet, whom he took home; Jerome says Girardet, much attached to Monsieur Savaron, was as upset as he was. When Monsieur Savaron got into the carriage he looked like death. Jerome heard him tell the postilion, ‘The Geneva Road!’”

“Did Jerome ask the name of the stranger at the Hotel National?”

“As the old gentleman did not mean to stay, he was not asked for it. The servant, by his orders no doubt, pretended not to speak French.”

“And the letter which came so late to the Abbe de Grancey?” Rosalie asked.

“It was probably Monsieur Girardet who ought to have delivered it; but Jerome says poor Monsieur Girardet was much upset. The one who came so mysteriously, as Mademoiselle Galard says, has gone away just as mysteriously.”

After hearing this, Mademoiselle de Watteville fell into a brooding, absent mood. Besancon was in commotion over the disappearance of Monsieur Savaron. It was understood the Prefect had readily given him a passport across the frontier, leaving him free of his only opponent; the next day Monsieur de Chavoncourt was carried to the top by a majority of a hundred and forty votes.

“Jack is gone by the way he came,” said an elector on hearing of Albert Savaron’s flight.

The affair strengthened local prejudice against strangers, reinforced by the earlier matter of the Republican newspaper. Ten days later Albert de Savarus was never spoken of again. Only three persons—Girardet the attorney, the Vicar-General, and Rosalie—were seriously affected by his disappearance. Girardet knew the white-haired stranger was Prince Soderini, having seen his card; the Vicar-General was told; Rosalie, better informed, had known for three months that the Duc d’Argaiolo was dead.

By April 1836 no news of Albert de Savarus had come. Jerome and Mariette were to be married, but the Baroness wished her maid to wait until her daughter’s marriage, saying the two weddings might occur together.

“It is time Rosalie should be married,” the Baroness told Monsieur de Watteville. “She is nineteen and fearfully altered these last months.”

“I do not know what ails her,” said the Baron.

“When fathers do not know what ails their daughters, mothers can guess,” the Baroness retorted. “We must get her married.”

“I am quite willing,” the Baron said. “I shall give her les Rouxey now that the Court has settled our quarrel with the authorities of Riceys by fixing the boundary line at three hundred feet up the Dent de Vilard. I am having a trench made to collect the water and carry it into the lake. The village did not appeal, so the decision is final.”

“That decision cost me thirty thousand francs paid to Chantonnit. If you give away les Rouxey, you will have nothing left,” the Baroness warned.

“I do not need much,” he replied. “I am breaking up.”

“You eat like an ogre!”

“Just so. But however much I may eat, I feel my legs get weaker—”

“It is from working the lathe,” said his wife.

“I do not know,” he answered.

“We will marry Rosalie to Monsieur de Soulas; if you give her les Rouxey, keep the life interest. I will give them fifteen thousand francs a year in the funds. Our children can live here; they are not much to be pitied.”

“No. I shall give them les Rouxey out and out. Rosalie is fond of les Rouxey.”

“You are a queer man with your daughter! It does not occur to you to ask me if I am fond of les Rouxey.”

Rosalie was sent for and informed she was to marry Monsieur de Soulas in early May.

“I am obliged to you, mother and father, for thinking of settling me; but I do not mean to marry. I am very happy with you.”

“Mere speeches!” the Baroness said. “You are not in love with Monsieur de Soulas, that is all.”

“If you insist on the plain truth, I will never marry Monsieur de Soulas—”

“Oh! the ‘never’ of a girl of nineteen!” retorted her mother with a bitter smile.

“The never of Mademoiselle de Watteville,” Rosalie said firmly. “My father, I imagine, has no intention of making me marry against my wishes?”

“No, indeed no!” the poor Baron said, looking affectionately at his daughter.

“Very well!” the Baroness, controlling her rage, said sternly. “You yourself, Monsieur de Watteville, may take the responsibility of settling your daughter. Consider well, mademoiselle, for if you do not marry to my mind you will get nothing out of me!”

The quarrel grew so bitter that Rosalie and her father were obliged to spend the summer at les Rouxey; life at the Hotel de Rupt became unendurable. It was thus known in Besancon that Mademoiselle de Watteville had positively refused the Comte de Soulas.

After their marriage Mariette and Jerome came to les Rouxey to succeed Modinier. The Baron restored and repaired the house to suit his daughter’s taste. When Madame de Watteville learned these improvements cost about sixty thousand francs, and that Rosalie and her father were building a conservatory, she saw spite in her daughter. The Baron purchased outlying plots and a little estate worth thirty thousand francs. Away from her mother, Rosalie showed practical qualities: she improved the value of les Rouxey, treated herself to a riding habit, rode about, and made her father very happy; his complaints ceased and he grew fat. As the Baroness’ name-day approached—the Baroness was Louise—the Vicar-General visited les Rouxey, deputed to negotiate peace.

“That little Rosalie has a head on her shoulders,” the folk of Besancon said.

After paying the ninety thousand francs spent on les Rouxey, the Baroness allowed her husband a thousand francs a month; she would not be in the wrong. The father and daughter agreed to return to Besancon for August 15 and remain through the month.

After dinner the Vicar-General took Mademoiselle de Watteville aside to discuss marriage, explaining it was vain to hope for Albert, of whom they had had no news for a year. Rosalie stopped him with a sign, led him to a seat under rhododendrons overlooking the lake, and said tenderly, “Listen, dear Abbe. You whom I love as much as my father, for you had an affection for my Albert, I must confess I committed crimes to become his wife, and he must be my husband. Here; read this.”

She produced a number of the Gazette and pointed out a Florence item of May 25th:

“The wedding of Monsieur le Duc de Rhetore, eldest son of the Duc de Chaulieu, to Madame la Duchesse d’Argaiolo, née Princess Soderini, was solemnized with great splendor. Numerous entertainments in Florence celebrate the marriage. The Duchess’ fortune is large, for the late Duke left her everything.”

“The woman he loved is married,” she said. “I divided them.”

“You? How?” asked the Abbe.

Rosalie was about to explain when two gardeners cried out as a body fell into the water; she started and ran off screaming, “Oh! father!”—the Baron had disappeared.

Trying to reach a piece of granite where he fancied he saw an impression of a shell, the Baron had slipped into the lake, deepest beneath the roadway. The men struggled and managed to get him to catch a pole where the water bubbled; at last they pulled him out, covered with mud in which he had sunk deeper by struggling. He had dined heavily and digestion was interrupted.

Undressed, washed, and put to bed, he was in such danger that two servants rode for help: one to Besancon, the other for the nearest doctor and surgeon. When Madame de Watteville arrived eight hours later with aid from Besancon, the Baron was past hope despite the Rouxey doctor’s efforts. The fright had produced effusion on the brain; shock to digestion aided his decline.

Madame de Watteville declared it would not have happened had her husband stayed in Besancon. She blamed her daughter’s obstinacy, took an aversion to Rosalie, and abandoned herself to exaggerated grief. She spoke of the Baron as “her dear lamb!”

The last of the Wattevilles was buried on an island in the lake at les Rouxey, where the Baroness had a little white marble Gothic monument erected.

A month after this catastrophe the mother and daughter settled in the Hotel de Rupt in savage silence. Rosalie was truly sorrowful and accused herself of her father’s death; she feared another disaster she thought was her fault. Neither Girardet nor the Abbe de Grancey could obtain information about Albert. This silence appalled her. In a paroxysm of repentance she felt compelled to confess to the Vicar-General the horrible machinations by which she had separated Francesca and Albert. They had been simple but terrible.

Mademoiselle de Watteville had intercepted Albert’s letters to the Duchess and one in which Francesca announced her husband’s illness, warning her lover that she could write him no more while she attended the sick man. Thus, while Albert was consumed by election business, the Duchess had written him only two letters: one informing him the Duc d’Argaiolo was in danger, the other announcing her widowhood—two noble letters Rosalie kept. After several nights’ labor she imitated Albert’s handwriting perfectly and substituted three forged letters of her own for three of Albert’s. The rough copies she showed the old priest made him shudder—the skill of the forgeries was appalling. Rosalie, writing in Albert’s name, prepared the Duchess for a change in the Frenchman’s feelings, falsely representing him as faithless, and answered the news of the Duc d’Argaiolo’s death by announcing the imminent marriage of Albert and Mademoiselle de Watteville. The two letters, meant to cross, did so. The Vicar-General read them twice in horror. Francesca, stabbed by a girl who wanted to kill love in her rival, had answered with four words: “You are free. Farewell.”

“Purely moral crimes, which give no hold to human justice, are the most atrocious and detestable,” the Abbe said severely. “God often punishes them on earth; hence the terrible catastrophes that seem inexplicable. Of all secret crimes, the most disgraceful is breaking the seal of a letter or reading it surreptitiously. Whoever does it stains his honor beyond retrieval.

“Do you not feel all that is touching in the story of the youthful page, falsely accused, carrying the letter ordering his execution—who sets out without thought of ill, and whom Providence miraculously protects? Virtue has a glory as potent as that of innocent childhood.

“I say this not to admonish you,” the old priest went on. “I am not your spiritual director; I am your friend, appalled by dread of your punishment. What has become of that unhappy Albert? Has he, perhaps, killed himself? Tremendous passion lurked under his assumed calm. I understand now that Prince Soderini came to take back his daughter’s letters and portraits. This thunderbolt fell on Albert’s head, and he went off, no doubt, to try to justify himself. But how is it that in fourteen months he has given us no news?”

“Oh! if I marry him, he will be so happy!”

“Happy? He does not love you. Besides, you have no great fortune to give him. Your mother detests you; you made her a fierce reply which will be your ruin. When she told you obedience was the way to repair your errors, and to marry, mentioning Amedee—you flung in her face, ‘If you are so fond of him, marry him yourself, mother!’—Did you say this?”

“Yes,” Rosalie admitted.

“Well, I know her,” the Abbe continued. “In a few months she will be Comtesse de Soulas and likely to have children; she will give Monsieur de Soulas forty thousand francs a year and reduce your share as much as possible. You will be poor while she lives, and she is only thirty-eight. Your whole estate will be les Rouxey and what is left after your father’s debts. From material and sentimental viewpoints you have done badly. Instead of going to your mother—” Rosalie shook her head fiercely.

“To your mother,” the priest went on, “and to religion, where you would have found counsel at the first impulse, you chose your own course, knowing nothing of life and listening only to passion!”

These words terrified Rosalie.

“And what ought I to do now?” she asked.

“To repair your wrong-doing, you must ascertain its extent,” said the Abbe.

“Well, I will write to the only man who can know anything of Albert’s fate, Monsieur Leopold Hannequin, a notary in Paris, his friend since childhood.”

“Write no more, unless to do honor to truth,” said the Vicar-General. “Place the real and false letters in my hands, confess everything as though I were your confessor, ask how to expiate your sins, and do as I bid you. Above all, restore this unfortunate man to innocence in the eyes of the woman he had made his divinity on earth. Though he has lost his happiness, Albert must still hope for justification.”

Rosalie promised to obey the Abbe, hoping his steps might bring Albert back.

Not long after her confession a clerk came to Besancon from Monsieur Leopold Hannequin, armed with a power of attorney from Albert, and called first on Monsieur Girardet, begging help to sell Monsieur Savaron’s house. The attorney undertook this out of friendship for Albert. The clerk sold the furniture and could repay some money Savaron owed Girardet, who had lent him five thousand francs on his mysterious departure while undertaking to collect his assets. When Girardet asked what had become of the noble pleader, the clerk said no one knew, and that the notary seemed greatly distressed by the contents of the last letter from Monsieur Albert de Savarus.

On hearing this, the Vicar-General wrote to Leopold. The notary’s reply read in essence:

Paris. Alas, monsieur, it is in nobody’s power to restore Albert to the world; he has renounced it. He is a novice in the monastery of the Grand Chartreuse near Grenoble. On the threshold of that cloister everything dies. Albert, foreseeing I might go to him, placed the General of the Order between my efforts and himself. I know his noble soul; he is the victim of some odious plot unknown to us; but everything is at an end. The Duchesse d’Argaiolo, now Duchesse de Rhetore, seems to have carried severity to an extreme. At Belgirate, which she left when Albert flew thither, she left instructions making him think she lived in London. From London Albert went to Naples and Rome, where she was engaged to the Duc de Rhetore. When Albert saw Madame d’Argaiolo at Florence, it was at her marriage ceremony. Our poor friend swooned in the church; even in danger of death he could get no explanation from her. For seven months he traveled in pursuit of a cruel creature who thought it sport to escape him; he did not know how to catch her.

“I saw him in Paris; had you seen him, as I did, you would have feared mentioning the Duchess, at risk of wrecking his reason. If he had known his crime he might have justified himself; but being falsely accused of being married—what could he do? Albert is dead to the world. He longed for rest; let us hope his silence and prayer may give him another happiness. You must pity him and his friends.”

As soon as he received this the Vicar-General wrote to the General of the Carthusian order and received a letter from Albert:

Brother Albert to Monsieur l’Abbe de Grancey, Vicar-General of the Diocese of Besancon.

La Grande Chartreuse.

“I recognized your tender soul, dear Vicar-General, in what the Reverend Father General has told me. You have understood the only wish that lurks in my heart with regard to the world—to obtain justice from her who treated me so badly! But before letting me avail myself of your offer, the General wanted to know my vocation was sincere; he told me his idea when he found I was determined to preserve silence. If I had sought to rehabilitate the man of the world, the friar would have been rejected. Grace has done her work; the struggle was short but keen. Is not this enough to prove I could never return to the world?

“Hence my forgiveness, which you ask for the author of so much woe, is entire and without vindictiveness. I will pray to God to forgive that young lady as I forgive her, and I shall beseech Him to give Madame de Rhetore a life of happiness. Whether death, a girl’s obstinacy, or blows ascribed to chance, must we not all obey God? Sorrow in some souls makes a vast void through which the Divine Voice rings. I learned too late the bearings of this life on that which awaits us; all in me is worn out; I could not serve in the ranks of the Church Militant, and I lay the remains of an almost extinct life at the foot of the altar.

“This is the last time I shall ever write. You alone, who loved me, and whom I loved so well, could make me break the law of oblivion I imposed when I entered Saint Bruno’s headquarters; you are especially named in my prayers.

“Brother Albert. November 1836.”

“Everything is for the best perhaps,” thought the Abbe de Grancey.

When he showed this letter to Rosalie, who kissed the lines that contained her forgiveness, he said, “Well, now that he is lost to you, will you not be reconciled to your mother and marry the Comte de Soulas?”

“Only if Albert should order it,” she said.

“But you see it is impossible to consult him. The General would not allow it.”

“If I were to go to see him?”

“No Carthusian sees visitors; besides, no woman but the Queen of France may enter a Carthusian monastery,” said the Abbe. “So you have no longer any excuse for not marrying Monsieur de Soulas.”

“I do not wish to destroy my mother’s happiness,” Rosalie replied.

“Satan!” exclaimed the Vicar-General.

Towards the end of that winter the worthy Abbe de Grancey died. He no longer stood between Madame de Watteville and her daughter to soften two iron wills.

The event he had foretold took place. In August 1837 Madame de Watteville was married to Monsieur de Soulas in Paris, whither she went by Rosalie’s advice; the girl displayed sweetness and kindness to her mother, who believed it was genuine. Madame de Watteville thought of nothing but avenging Savarus by torturing his rival.

Mademoiselle de Watteville had been declared legally of age; she was nearly twenty-one. Her mother, to settle with her finally, resigned claims on les Rouxey and Rosalie signed a release for all the Baron’s inheritance. Rosalie encouraged her mother to marry the Comte de Soulas and settle her fortune on him.

“Let us each be perfectly free,” she said.

The Comtesse, uneasy about her daughter’s intentions, was touched by this liberality and made Rosalie a present of six thousand francs a year as conscience money. The Comtesse had an income of forty-eight thousand francs and could not alienate her lands; Mademoiselle de Watteville remained an heiress of eighteen hundred thousand francs; les Rouxey, with additions and improvements, might yield twenty thousand francs a year besides house value, rents, and preserves. Rosalie and her mother easily gained introductions to the best society; the golden key—eighteen hundred thousand francs—did far more for the Comtesse than pretensions of lineage.

In February 1838 Rosalie, eagerly courted, achieved her aim: to meet the Duchesse de Rhetore, to see the woman whose life she had ruined, and overwhelm her with remorse. Rosalie adopted the utmost elegance and vanities to face the Duchess on equal footing.

They first met at a post-1830 annual ball for pensioners on the old Civil List. A young man, prompted by Rosalie, pointed her out to the Duchess, saying: “There is a remarkable young person, a strong-minded lady who drove a clever man into a monastery—Albert de Savarus, whose career she wrecked. She is Mademoiselle de Watteville, the famous Besancon heiress—”

The Duchess turned pale. Rosalie’s eyes met hers with a flash more fatal than pistols. Francesca Soderini, who had suspected Albert might be innocent, hurried out of the ballroom, leaving the speaker to wonder what blow he had inflicted.

“If you want to hear more about Albert, come to the Opera ball on Tuesday with a marigold,” an anonymous note from Rosalie said to the Duchess, bringing her to the ball. There Mademoiselle de Watteville placed in the Duchess’ hand all of Albert’s letters, the Abbe de Grancey’s letter to Leopold Hannequin, the notary’s reply, and Rosalie’s confession to the Abbe.

“I will not be the only sufferer,” she told her rival, “for one has been as ruthless as the other.”

Having enjoyed the dismay on the Duchess’ beautiful face, Rosalie went away, made no more public appearances for a time, and returned to Besancon with her mother.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Mademoiselle de Watteville, who lived alone on her estate of les Rouxey—riding, hunting, refusing several offers a year, going to Besançon several times each winter, and improving her land—was regarded as an eccentric personage. She was one of the celebrities of the Eastern provinces.

Madame de Soulas has two children, a boy and a girl, and seems younger, but Monsieur de Soulas has aged considerably.

“My fortune has cost me dear,” said he to young Chavoncourt. “Really to know a bigot it is unfortunately necessary to marry her!”

Mademoiselle de Watteville behaves in the most extraordinary manner. “She has vagaries,” people say. Every year she goes to gaze at the walls of the Grande Chartreuse. Perhaps she dreams of imitating her grand-uncle Watteville, who broke through his monastery walls to regain his liberty, by forcing those walls to find a husband.

She left Besançon in 1841 purportedly to marry; the real reason remains unknown, for she returned in a condition that forbids her ever appearing in society again. By one of those chances the Abbé de Grancey had mentioned, she was on the Loire in a steamboat whose boiler burst. Mademoiselle de Watteville was so severely injured that she lost her right arm and her left leg; fearful scars have taken her beauty; her health is so shattered she has few days free from suffering. In short, she now never leaves the Chartreuse of les Rouxey, where she leads a life devoted entirely to religious practices.

PARIS, May 1842.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Beauseant, Vicomtesse de
       Father Goriot
       The Deserted Woman

     Genovese
       Massimilla Doni

     Hannequin, Leopold
       Beatrix
       Cousin Betty
       Cousin Pons

     Jeanrenaud
       The Commission in Lunacy

     Nueil, Gaston de
       The Deserted Woman

     Rhetore, Duc Alphonse de
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Letters of Two Brides
       The Member for Arcis

     Savaron de Savarus
       The Quest of the Absolute

     Savarus, Albert Savaron de
       The Quest of the Absolute

     Schinner, Hippolyte
       The Purse
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Pierre Grassou
       A Start in Life
       The Government Clerks
       Modeste Mignon
       The Imaginary Mistress
       The Unconscious Humorists

     Tinti, Clarina
       Massimilla Doni
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################