Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny





THE LILY OF THE VALLEY


By Honore De Balzac


Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley



                             DEDICATION

  To Monsieur J. B. Nacquart,
  Member of the Royal Academy of Medicine.

  Dear Doctor--Here is one of the most carefully hewn stones in the
  second course of the foundation of a literary edifice which I have
  slowly and laboriously constructed. I wish to inscribe your name
  upon it, as much to thank the man whose science once saved me as
  to honor the friend of my daily life.


                                                       De Balzac.





THE LILY OF THE VALLEY


  ENVOI

  Felix de Vandenesse to Madame la Comtesse Natalie de Manerville:

  I yield to your wishes. It is the privilege of the women whom we
  love more than they love us to make the men who love them ignore
  the ordinary rules of common-sense. To smooth the frown upon their
  brow, to soften the pout upon their lips, what obstacles we
  miraculously overcome! We shed our blood, we risk our future!

  You exact the history of my past life; here it is. But remember
  this, Natalie; in obeying you I crush under foot a reluctance
  hitherto unconquerable. Why are you jealous of the sudden reveries
  which overtake me in the midst of our happiness? Why show the
  pretty anger of a petted woman when silence grasps me? Could you
  not play upon the contradictions of my character without inquiring
  into the causes of them? Are there secrets in your heart which
  seek absolution through a knowledge of mine? Ah! Natalie, you have
  guessed mine; and it is better you should know the whole truth.
  Yes, my life is shadowed by a phantom; a word evokes it; it hovers
  vaguely above me and about me; within my soul are solemn memories,
  buried in its depths like those marine productions seen in calmest
  weather and which the storms of ocean cast in fragments on the
  shore.

  The mental labor which the expression of ideas necessitates has
  revived the old, old feelings which give me so much pain when they
  come suddenly; and if in this confession of my past they break
  forth in a way that wounds you, remember that you threatened to
  punish me if I did not obey your wishes, and do not, therefore,
  punish my obedience. I would that this, my confidence, might
  increase your love.

  Until we meet,

  Felix.



CHAPTER I. TWO CHILDHOODS

To what genius fed on tears shall we some day owe that most touching of
all elegies,--the tale of tortures borne silently by souls whose tender
roots find stony ground in the domestic soil, whose earliest buds are
torn apart by rancorous hands, whose flowers are touched by frost at the
moment of their blossoming? What poet will sing the sorrows of the child
whose lips must suck a bitter breast, whose smiles are checked by the
cruel fire of a stern eye? The tale that tells of such poor hearts,
oppressed by beings placed about them to promote the development of
their natures, would contain the true history of my childhood.

What vanity could I have wounded,--I a child new-born? What moral or
physical infirmity caused by mother’s coldness? Was I the child of
duty, whose birth is a mere chance, or was I one whose very life was
a reproach? Put to nurse in the country and forgotten by my family for
over three years, I was treated with such indifference on my return to
the parental roof that even the servants pitied me. I do not know to
what feeling or happy accident I owed my rescue from this first neglect;
as a child I was ignorant of it, as a man I have not discovered it. Far
from easing my lot, my brother and my two sisters found amusement in
making me suffer. The compact in virtue of which children hide each
other’s peccadilloes, and which early teaches them the principles
of honor, was null and void in my case; more than that, I was often
punished for my brother’s faults, without being allowed to prove the
injustice. The fawning spirit which seems instinctive in children
taught my brother and sisters to join in the persecutions to which I was
subjected, and thus keep in the good graces of a mother whom they
feared as much as I. Was this partly the effect of a childish love of
imitation; was it from a need of testing their powers; or was it simply
through lack of pity? Perhaps these causes united to deprive me of the
sweets of fraternal intercourse.

Disinherited of all affection, I could love nothing; yet nature had made
me loving. Is there an angel who garners the sighs of feeling hearts
rebuffed incessantly? If in many such hearts the crushed feelings turn
to hatred, in mine they condensed and hollowed a depth from which, in
after years, they gushed forth upon my life. In many characters the
habit of trembling relaxes the fibres and begets fear, and fear ends
in submission; hence, a weakness which emasculates a man, and makes him
more or less a slave. But in my case these perpetual tortures led to the
development of a certain strength, which increased through exercise
and predisposed my spirit to the habit of moral resistance. Always
in expectation of some new grief--as the martyrs expected some fresh
blow--my whole being expressed, I doubt not, a sullen resignation which
smothered the grace and gaiety of childhood, and gave me an appearance
of idiocy which seemed to justify my mother’s threatening prophecies.
The certainty of injustice prematurely roused my pride--that fruit
of reason--and thus, no doubt, checked the evil tendencies which an
education like mine encouraged.

Though my mother neglected me I was sometimes the object of her
solicitude; she occasionally spoke of my education and seemed desirous
of attending to it herself. Cold chills ran through me at such times
when I thought of the torture a daily intercourse with her would inflict
upon me. I blessed the neglect in which I lived, and rejoiced that I
could stay alone in the garden and play with the pebbles and watch the
insects and gaze into the blueness of the sky. Though my loneliness
naturally led me to reverie, my liking for contemplation was first
aroused by an incident which will give you an idea of my early troubles.
So little notice was taken of me that the governess occasionally forgot
to send me to bed. One evening I was peacefully crouching under a
fig-tree, watching a star with that passion of curiosity which takes
possession of a child’s mind, and to which my precocious melancholy
gave a sort of sentimental intuition. My sisters were playing about
and laughing; I heard their distant chatter like an accompaniment to my
thoughts. After a while the noise ceased and darkness fell. My mother
happened to notice my absence. To escape blame, our governess, a
terrible Mademoiselle Caroline, worked upon my mother’s fears,--told her
I had a horror of my home and would long ago have run away if she had
not watched me; that I was not stupid but sullen; and that in all her
experience of children she had never known one of so bad a disposition
as mine. She pretended to search for me. I answered as soon as I was
called, and she came to the fig-tree, where she very well knew I was.
“What are you doing there?” she asked. “Watching a star.” “You were
not watching a star,” said my mother, who was listening on her balcony;
“children of your age know nothing of astronomy.” “Ah, madame,” cried
Mademoiselle Caroline, “he has opened the faucet of the reservoir; the
garden is inundated!” Then there was a general excitement. The fact was
that my sisters had amused themselves by turning the cock to see the
water flow, but a sudden spurt wet them all over and frightened them
so much that they ran away without closing it. Accused and convicted
of this piece of mischief and told that I lied when I denied it, I was
severely punished. Worse than all, I was jeered at for my pretended love
of the stars and forbidden to stay in the garden after dark.

Such tyrannical restrains intensify a passion in the hearts of children
even more than in those of men; children think of nothing but the
forbidden thing, which then becomes irresistibly attractive to them. I
was often whipped for my star. Unable to confide in my kind, I told it
all my troubles in that delicious inward prattle with which we stammer
our first ideas, just as once we stammered our first words. At twelve
years of age, long after I was at school, I still watched that star
with indescribable delight,--so deep and lasting are the impressions we
receive in the dawn of life.

My brother Charles, five years older than I and as handsome a boy as he
now is a man, was the favorite of my father, the idol of my mother, and
consequently the sovereign of the house. He was robust and well-made,
and had a tutor. I, puny and even sickly, was sent at five years of age
as day pupil to a school in the town; taken in the morning and brought
back at night by my father’s valet. I was sent with a scanty lunch,
while my school-fellows brought plenty of good food. This trifling
contrast between my privations and their prosperity made me suffer
deeply. The famous potted pork prepared at Tours and called “rillettes”
and “rillons” was the chief feature of their mid-day meal, between
the early breakfast and the parent’s dinner, which was ready when we
returned from school. This preparation of meat, much prized by certain
gourmands, is seldom seen at Tours on aristocratic tables; if I had
ever heard of it before I went to school, I certainly had never had
the happiness of seeing that brown mess spread on slices of bread and
butter. Nevertheless, my desire for those “rillons” was so great that it
grew to be a fixed idea, like the longing of an elegant Parisian duchess
for the stews cooked by a porter’s wife,--longings which, being a woman,
she found means to satisfy. Children guess each other’s covetousness,
just as you are able to read a man’s love, by the look in the eyes;
consequently I became an admirable butt for ridicule. My comrades,
nearly all belonging to the lower bourgeoisie, would show me their
“rillons” and ask if I knew how they were made and where they were sold,
and why it was that I never had any. They licked their lips as they
talked of them--scraps of pork pressed in their own fat and looking like
cooked truffles; they inspected my lunch-basket, and finding nothing
better than Olivet cheese or dried fruits, they plagued me
with questions: “Is that all you have? have you really nothing
else?”--speeches which made me realize the difference between my brother
and myself.

This contrast between my own abandonment and the happiness of others
nipped the roses of my childhood and blighted my budding youth. The
first time that I, mistaking my comrades’ actions for generosity, put
forth my hand to take the dainty I had so long coveted and which was now
hypocritically held out to me, my tormentor pulled back his slice to the
great delight of his comrades who were expecting that result. If noble
and distinguished minds are, as we often find them, capable of vanity,
can we blame the child who weeps when despised and jeered at? Under such
a trial many boys would have turned into gluttons and cringing beggars.
I fought to escape my persecutors. The courage of despair made me
formidable; but I was hated, and thus had no protection against
treachery. One evening as I left school I was struck in the back by
a handful of small stones tied in a handkerchief. When the valet, who
punished the perpetrator, told this to my mother she exclaimed: “That
dreadful child! he will always be a torment to us.”

Finding that I inspired in my schoolmates the same repulsion that was
felt for me by my family, I sank into a horrible distrust of myself. A
second fall of snow checked the seeds that were germinating in my soul.
The boys whom I most liked were notorious scamps; this fact roused my
pride and I held aloof. Again I was shut up within myself and had no
vent for the feelings with which my heart was full. The master of the
school, observing that I was gloomy, disliked by my comrades, and always
alone, confirmed the family verdict as to my sulky temper. As soon as I
could read and write, my mother transferred me to Pont-le-Voy, a school
in charge of Oratorians who took boys of my age into a form called the
“class of the Latin steps” where dull lads with torpid brains were apt
to linger.

There I remained eight years without seeing my family; living the life
of a pariah,--partly for the following reason. I received but three
francs a month pocket-money, a sum barely sufficient to buy the pens,
ink, paper, knives, and rules which we were forced to supply ourselves.
Unable to buy stilts or skipping-ropes, or any of the things that were
used in the playground, I was driven out of the games; to gain admission
on suffrage I should have had to toady the rich and flatter the strong
of my division. My heart rose against either of these meannesses, which,
however, most children readily employ. I lived under a tree, lost in
dejected thought, or reading the books distributed to us monthly by the
librarian. How many griefs were in the shadow of that solitude; what
genuine anguish filled my neglected life! Imagine what my sore heart
felt when, at the first distribution of prizes,--of which I obtained
the two most valued, namely, for theme and for translation,--neither my
father nor my mother was present in the theatre when I came forward to
receive the awards amid general acclamations, although the building was
filled with the relatives of all my comrades. Instead of kissing the
distributor, according to custom, I burst into tears and threw myself on
his breast. That night I burned my crowns in the stove. The parents of
the other boys were in town for a whole week preceding the distribution
of the prizes, and my comrades departed joyfully the next day; while I,
whose father and mother were only a few miles distant, remained at the
school with the “outremers,”--a name given to scholars whose families
were in the colonies or in foreign countries.

You will notice throughout how my unhappiness increased in proportion as
the social spheres on which I entered widened. God knows what efforts I
made to weaken the decree which condemned me to live within myself! What
hopes, long cherished with eagerness of soul, were doomed to perish in
a day! To persuade my parents to come and see me, I wrote them letters
full of feeling, too emphatically worded, it may be; but surely such
letters ought not to have drawn upon me my mother’s reprimand, coupled
with ironical reproaches for my style. Not discouraged even then,
I implored the help of my sisters, to whom I always wrote on their
birthdays and fete-days with the persistence of a neglected child; but
it was all in vain. As the day for the distribution of prizes approached
I redoubled my entreaties, and told of my expected triumphs. Misled by
my parents’ silence, I expected them with a beating heart. I told my
schoolfellows they were coming; and then, when the old porter’s step
sounded in the corridors as he called my happy comrades one by one to
receive their friends, I was sick with expectation. Never did that old
man call my name!

One day, when I accused myself to my confessor of having cursed my life,
he pointed to the skies, where grew, he said, the promised palm for the
“Beati qui lugent” of the Saviour. From the period of my first communion
I flung myself into the mysterious depths of prayer, attracted to
religious ideas whose moral fairyland so fascinates young spirits.
Burning with ardent faith, I prayed to God to renew in my behalf the
miracles I had read of in martyrology. At five years of age I fled to
my star; at twelve I took refuge in the sanctuary. My ecstasy
brought dreams unspeakable, which fed my imagination, fostered my
susceptibilities, and strengthened my thinking powers. I have often
attributed those sublime visions to the guardian angel charged with
moulding my spirit to its divine destiny; they endowed my soul with the
faculty of seeing the inner soul of things; they prepared my heart for
the magic craft which makes a man a poet when the fatal power is his to
compare what he feels within him with reality,--the great things aimed
for with the small things gained. Those visions wrote upon my brain a
book in which I read that which I must voice; they laid upon my lips the
coal of utterance.

My father having conceived some doubts as to the tendency of the
Oratorian teachings, took me from Pont-le-Voy, and sent me to Paris to
an institution in the Marais. I was then fifteen. When examined as to
my capacity, I, who was in the rhetoric class at Pont-le-Voy, was
pronounced worthy of the third class. The sufferings I had endured in my
family and in school were continued under another form during my stay
at the Lepitre Academy. My father gave me no money; I was to be fed,
clothed, and stuffed with Latin and Greek, for a sum agreed on. During
my school life I came in contact with over a thousand comrades; but I
never met with such an instance of neglect and indifference as mine.
Monsieur Lepitre, who was fanatically attached to the Bourbons, had had
relations with my father at the time when all devoted royalists were
endeavoring to bring about the escape of Marie Antoinette from the
Temple. They had lately renewed acquaintance; and Monsieur Lepitre
thought himself obliged to repair my father’s oversight, and to give me
a small sum monthly. But not being authorized to do so, the amount was
small indeed.

The Lepitre establishment was in the old Joyeuse mansion where, as in
all seignorial houses, there was a porter’s lodge. During a recess,
which preceded the hour when the man-of-all-work took us to the
Charlemagne Lyceum, the well-to-do pupils used to breakfast with the
porter, named Doisy. Monsieur Lepitre was either ignorant of the fact or
he connived at this arrangement with Doisy, a regular smuggler whom it
was the pupils’ interest to protect,--he being the secret guardian
of their pranks, the safe confidant of their late returns and their
intermediary for obtaining forbidden books. Breakfast on a cup of
“cafe-au-lait” is an aristocratic habit, explained by the high prices
to which colonial products rose under Napoleon. If the use of sugar
and coffee was a luxury to our parents, with us it was the sign of
self-conscious superiority. Doisy gave credit, for he reckoned on the
sisters and aunts of the pupils, who made it a point of honor to pay
their debts. I resisted the blandishments of his place for a long time.
If my judges knew the strength of its seduction, the heroic efforts I
made after stoicism, the repressed desires of my long resistance, they
would pardon my final overthrow. But, child as I was, could I have the
grandeur of soul that scorns the scorn of others? Moreover, I may have
felt the promptings of several social vices whose power was increased by
my longings.

About the end of the second year my father and mother came to Paris. My
brother had written me the day of their arrival. He lived in Paris, but
had never been to see me. My sisters, he said, were of the party; we
were all to see Paris together. The first day we were to dine in the
Palais-Royal, so as to be near the Theatre-Francais. In spite of the
intoxication such a programme of unhoped-for delights excited, my joy
was dampened by the wind of a coming storm, which those who are used
to unhappiness apprehend instinctively. I was forced to own a debt of
a hundred francs to the Sieur Doisy, who threatened to ask my parents
himself for the money. I bethought me of making my brother the emissary
of Doisy, the mouth-piece of my repentance and the mediator of pardon.
My father inclined to forgiveness, but my mother was pitiless; her dark
blue eye froze me; she fulminated cruel prophecies: “What should I
be later if at seventeen years of age I committed such follies? Was I
really a son of hers? Did I mean to ruin my family? Did I think myself
the only child of the house? My brother Charles’s career, already begun,
required large outlay, amply deserved by his conduct which did honor to
the family, while mine would always disgrace it. Did I know nothing of
the value of money, and what I cost them? Of what use were coffee and
sugar to my education? Such conduct was the first step into all the
vices.”

After enduring the shock of this torrent which rasped my soul, I was
sent back to school in charge of my brother. I lost the dinner at the
Freres Provencaux, and was deprived of seeing Talma in Britannicus.
Such was my first interview with my mother after a separation of twelve
years.

When I had finished school my father left me under the guardianship of
Monsieur Lepitre. I was to study the higher mathematics, follow a course
of law for one year, and begin philosophy. Allowed to study in my own
room and released from the classes, I expected a truce with trouble.
But, in spite of my nineteen years, perhaps because of them, my father
persisted in the system which had sent me to school without food, to an
academy without pocket-money, and had driven me into debt to Doisy. Very
little money was allowed to me, and what can you do in Paris without
money? Moreover, my freedom was carefully chained up. Monsieur Lepitre
sent me to the law school accompanied by a man-of-all-work who handed me
over to the professor and fetched me home again. A young girl would have
been treated with less precaution than my mother’s fears insisted on for
me. Paris alarmed my parents, and justly. Students are secretly engaged
in the same occupation which fills the minds of young ladies in their
boarding-schools. Do what you will, nothing can prevent the latter from
talking of lovers, or the former of women. But in Paris, and especially
at this particular time, such talk among young lads was influenced by
the oriental and sultanic atmosphere and customs of the Palais-Royal.

The Palais-Royal was an Eldorado of love where the ingots melted away in
coin; there virgin doubts were over; there curiosity was appeased. The
Palais-Royal and I were two asymptotes bearing one towards the other,
yet unable to meet. Fate miscarried all my attempts. My father had
presented me to one of my aunts who lived in the Ile St. Louis. With her
I was to dine on Sundays and Thursdays, escorted to the house by either
Monsieur or Madame Lepitre, who went out themselves on those days and
were to call for me on their way home. Singular amusement for a
young lad! My aunt, the Marquise de Listomere, was a great lady, of
ceremonious habits, who would never have dreamed of offering me money.
Old as a cathedral, painted like a miniature, sumptuous in dress, she
lived in her great house as though Louis XV. were not dead, and saw none
but old women and men of a past day,--a fossil society which made me
think I was in a graveyard. No one spoke to me and I had not the courage
to speak first. Cold and alien looks made me ashamed of my youth,
which seemed to annoy them. I counted on this indifference to aid me in
certain plans; I was resolved to escape some day directly after dinner
and rush to the Palais-Royal. Once seated at whist my aunt would pay no
attention to me. Jean, the footman, cared little for Monsieur Lepitre
and would have aided me; but on the day I chose for my adventure that
luckless dinner was longer than usual,--either because the jaws employed
were worn out or the false teeth more imperfect. At last, between eight
and nine o’clock, I reached the staircase, my heart beating like that of
Bianca Capello on the day of her flight; but when the porter pulled the
cord I beheld in the street before me Monsieur Lepitre’s hackney-coach,
and I heard his pursy voice demanding me!

Three times did fate interpose between the hell of the Palais-Royal and
the heaven of my youth. On the day when I, ashamed at twenty years of
age of my own ignorance, determined to risk all dangers to put an end
to it, at the very moment when I was about to run away from Monsieur
Lepitre as he got into the coach,--a difficult process, for he was
as fat as Louis XVIII. and club-footed,--well, can you believe it, my
mother arrived in a post-chaise! Her glance arrested me; I stood
still, like a bird before a snake. What fate had brought her there? The
simplest thing in the world. Napoleon was then making his last efforts.
My father, who foresaw the return of the Bourbons, had come to Paris
with my mother to advise my brother, who was employed in the imperial
diplomatic service. My mother was to take me back with her, out of the
way of dangers which seemed, to those who followed the march of events
intelligently, to threaten the capital. In a few minutes, as it were, I
was taken out of Paris, at the very moment when my life there was about
to become fatal to me.

The tortures of imagination excited by repressed desires, the weariness
of a life depressed by constant privations had driven me to study, just
as men, weary of fate, confine themselves in a cloister. To me,
study had become a passion, which might even be fatal to my health by
imprisoning me at a period of life when young men ought to yield to the
bewitching activities of their springtide youth.

This slight sketch of my boyhood, in which you, Natalie, can readily
perceive innumerable songs of woe, was needful to explain to you its
influence on my future life. At twenty years of age, and affected by
many morbid elements, I was still small and thin and pale. My soul,
filled with the will to do, struggled with a body that seemed weakly,
but which, in the words of an old physician at Tours, was undergoing its
final fusion into a temperament of iron. Child in body and old in mind,
I had read and thought so much that I knew life metaphysically at its
highest reaches at the moment when I was about to enter the tortuous
difficulties of its defiles and the sandy roads of its plains. A strange
chance had held me long in that delightful period when the soul awakes
to its first tumults, to its desires for joy, and the savor of life
is fresh. I stood in the period between puberty and manhood,--the one
prolonged by my excessive study, the other tardily developing its living
shoots. No young man was ever more thoroughly prepared to feel and to
love. To understand my history, let your mind dwell on that pure time
of youth when the mouth is innocent of falsehood; when the glance of
the eye is honest, though veiled by lids which droop from timidity
contradicting desire; when the soul bends not to worldly Jesuitism,
and the heart throbs as violently from trepidation as from the generous
impulses of young emotion.

I need say nothing of the journey I made with my mother from Paris to
Tours. The coldness of her behavior repressed me. At each relay I tried
to speak; but a look, a word from her frightened away the speeches I had
been meditating. At Orleans, where we had passed the night, my mother
complained of my silence. I threw myself at her feet and clasped her
knees; with tears I opened my heart. I tried to touch hers by the
eloquence of my hungry love in accents that might have moved a
stepmother. She replied that I was playing comedy. I complained that she
had abandoned me. She called me an unnatural child. My whole nature was
so wrung that at Blois I went upon the bridge to drown myself in the
Loire. The height of the parapet prevented my suicide.

When I reached home, my two sisters, who did not know me, showed
more surprise than tenderness. Afterwards, however, they seemed, by
comparison, to be full of kindness towards me. I was given a room on the
third story. You will understand the extent of my hardships when I tell
you that my mother left me, a young man of twenty, without other linen
than my miserable school outfit, or any other outside clothes than those
I had long worn in Paris. If I ran from one end of the room to the other
to pick up her handkerchief, she took it with the cold thanks a lady
gives to her footman. Driven to watch her to find if there were any soft
spot where I could fasten the rootlets of affection, I came to see
her as she was,--a tall, spare woman, given to cards, egotistical and
insolent, like all the Listomeres, who count insolence as part of their
dowry. She saw nothing in life except duties to be fulfilled. All
cold women whom I have known made, as she did, a religion of duty; she
received our homage as a priest receives the incense of the mass. My
elder brother appeared to absorb the trifling sentiment of maternity
which was in her nature. She stabbed us constantly with her sharp
irony,--the weapon of those who have no heart,--and which she used
against us, who could make her no reply.

Notwithstanding these thorny hindrances, the instinctive sentiments
have so many roots, the religious fear inspired by a mother whom it
is dangerous to displease holds by so many threads, that the sublime
mistake--if I may so call it--of our love for our mother lasted until
the day, much later in our lives, when we judged her finally. This
terrible despotism drove from my mind all thoughts of the voluptuous
enjoyments I had dreamed of finding at Tours. In despair I took refuge
in my father’s library, where I set myself to read every book I did not
know. These long periods of hard study saved me from contact with my
mother; but they aggravated the dangers of my moral condition. Sometimes
my eldest sister--she who afterwards married our cousin, the Marquis de
Listomere--tried to comfort me, without, however, being able to calm the
irritation to which I was a victim. I desired to die.

Great events, of which I knew nothing, were then in preparation. The Duc
d’Angouleme, who had left Bordeaux to join Louis XVIII. in Paris, was
received in every town through which he passed with ovations inspired by
the enthusiasm felt throughout old France at the return of the Bourbons.
Touraine was aroused for its legitimate princes; the town itself was
in a flutter, every window decorated, the inhabitants in their Sunday
clothes, a festival in preparation, and that nameless excitement in the
air which intoxicates, and which gave me a strong desire to be present
at the ball given by the duke. When I summoned courage to make this
request of my mother, who was too ill to go herself, she became
extremely angry. “Had I come from Congo?” she inquired. “How could I
suppose that our family would not be represented at the ball? In
the absence of my father and brother, of course it was my duty to be
present. Had I no mother? Was she not always thinking of the welfare of
her children?”

In a moment the semi-disinherited son had become a personage! I was more
dumfounded by my importance than by the deluge of ironical reasoning
with which my mother received my request. I questioned my sisters, and
then discovered that my mother, who liked such theatrical plots,
was already attending to my clothes. The tailors in Tours were fully
occupied by the sudden demands of their regular customers, and my mother
was forced to employ her usual seamstress, who--according to provincial
custom--could do all kinds of sewing. A bottle-blue coat had been
secretly made for me, after a fashion, and silk stockings and pumps
provided; waistcoats were then worn short, so that I could wear one
of my father’s; and for the first time in my life I had a shirt with a
frill, the pleatings of which puffed out my chest and were gathered
in to the knot of my cravat. When dressed in this apparel I looked so
little like myself that my sister’s compliments nerved me to face
all Touraine at the ball. But it was a bold enterprise. Thanks to my
slimness I slipped into a tent set up in the gardens of the Papion
house, and found a place close to the armchair in which the duke was
seated. Instantly I was suffocated by the heat, and dazzled by the
lights, the scarlet draperies, the gilded ornaments, the dresses, and
the diamonds of the first public ball I had ever witnessed. I was pushed
hither and thither by a mass of men and women, who hustled each other in
a cloud of dust. The brazen clash of military music was drowned in the
hurrahs and acclamations of “Long live the Duc d’Angouleme! Long live
the King! Long live the Bourbons!” The ball was an outburst of pent-up
enthusiasm, where each man endeavored to outdo the rest in his fierce
haste to worship the rising sun,--an exhibition of partisan greed which
left me unmoved, or rather, it disgusted me and drove me back within
myself.

Swept onward like a straw in the whirlwind, I was seized with a childish
desire to be the Duc d’Angouleme himself, to be one of these princes
parading before an awed assemblage. This silly fancy of a Tourangean lad
roused an ambition to which my nature and the surrounding circumstances
lent dignity. Who would not envy such worship?--a magnificent repetition
of which I saw a few months later, when all Paris rushed to the feet
of the Emperor on his return from Elba. The sense of this dominion
exercised over the masses, whose feelings and whose very life are thus
merged into one soul, dedicated me then and thenceforth to glory, that
priestess who slaughters the Frenchmen of to-day as the Druidess once
sacrificed the Gauls.

Suddenly I met the woman who was destined to spur these ambitious
desires and to crown them by sending me into the heart of royalty.
Too timid to ask any one to dance,--fearing, moreover, to confuse the
figures,--I naturally became very awkward, and did not know what to do with my arms and legs. Just as I was suffering severely from the
pressure of the crowd an officer stepped on my feet, swollen by the new
leather of my shoes as well as by the heat. This disgusted me with the
whole affair. It was impossible to get away; but I took refuge in a
corner of a room at the end of an empty bench, where I sat with
fixed eyes, motionless and sullen. Misled by my puny appearance, a
woman--taking me for a sleepy child--slid softly into the place beside
me, with the motion of a bird as she drops upon her nest. Instantly I
breathed the woman-atmosphere, which irradiated my soul as, in after
days, oriental poesy has shone there. I looked at my neighbor, and was
more dazzled by that vision than I had been by the scene of the fete.

If you have understood this history of my early life you will guess
the feelings which now welled up within me. My eyes rested suddenly
on white, rounded shoulders where I would fain have laid my
head,--shoulders faintly rosy, which seemed to blush as if uncovered for
the first time; modest shoulders, that possessed a soul, and reflected
light from their satin surface as from a silken texture. These shoulders
were parted by a line along which my eyes wandered. I raised myself to
see the bust and was spell-bound by the beauty of the bosom, chastely
covered with gauze, where blue-veined globes of perfect outline were
softly hidden in waves of lace. The slightest details of the head were
each and all enchantments which awakened infinite delights within
me; the brilliancy of the hair laid smoothly above a neck as soft
and velvety as a child’s, the white lines drawn by the comb where my
imagination ran as along a dewy path,--all these things put me, as it
were, beside myself. Glancing round to be sure that no one saw me, I
threw myself upon those shoulders as a child upon the breast of its
mother, kissing them as I laid my head there. The woman uttered a
piercing cry, which the noise of the music drowned; she turned, saw
me, and exclaimed, “Monsieur!” Ah! had she said, “My little lad, what
possesses you?” I might have killed her; but at the word “Monsieur!” hot
tears fell from my eyes. I was petrified by a glance of saintly anger,
by a noble face crowned with a diadem of golden hair in harmony with
the shoulders I adored. The crimson of offended modesty glowed on her
cheeks, though already it was appeased by the pardoning instinct of
a woman who comprehends a frenzy which she inspires, and divines the
infinite adoration of those repentant tears. She moved away with the
step and carriage of a queen.

I then felt the ridicule of my position; for the first time I realized
that I was dressed like the monkey of a barrel organ. I was ashamed.
There I stood, stupefied,--tasting the fruit that I had stolen,
conscious of the warmth upon my lips, repenting not, and following with
my eyes the woman who had come down to me from heaven. Sick with the
first fever of the heart I wandered through the rooms, unable to find
mine Unknown, until at last I went home to bed, another man.

A new soul, a soul with rainbow wings, had burst its chrysalis.
Descending from the azure wastes where I had long admired her, my star
had come to me a woman, with undiminished lustre and purity. I loved,
knowing naught of love. How strange a thing, this first irruption of the
keenest human emotion in the heart of a man! I had seen pretty women in
other places, but none had made the slightest impression upon me.
Can there be an appointed hour, a conjunction of stars, a union of
circumstances, a certain woman among all others to awaken an exclusive
passion at the period of life when love includes the whole sex?

The thought that my Elect lived in Touraine made the air I breathed
delicious; the blue of the sky seemed bluer than I had ever yet seen it.
I raved internally, but externally I was seriously ill, and my mother
had fears, not unmingled with remorse. Like animals who know when danger
is near, I hid myself away in the garden to think of the kiss that I
had stolen. A few days after this memorable ball my mother attributed my
neglect of study, my indifference to her tyrannical looks and sarcasms,
and my gloomy behavior to the condition of my health. The country, that
perpetual remedy for ills that doctors cannot cure, seemed to her the
best means of bringing me out of my apathy. She decided that I should
spend a few weeks at Frapesle, a chateau on the Indre midway between
Montbazon and Azay-le-Rideau, which belonged to a friend of hers, to
whom, no doubt, she gave private instructions.

By the day when I thus for the first time gained my liberty I had swum
so vigorously in Love’s ocean that I had well-nigh crossed it. I knew
nothing of mine unknown lady, neither her name, nor where to find
her; to whom, indeed, could I speak of her? My sensitive nature so
exaggerated the inexplicable fears which beset all youthful hearts at
the first approach of love that I began with the melancholy which often
ends a hopeless passion. I asked nothing better than to roam about the
country, to come and go and live in the fields. With the courage of
a child that fears no failure, in which there is something really
chivalrous, I determined to search every chateau in Touraine, travelling
on foot, and saying to myself as each old tower came in sight, “She is
there!”

Accordingly, of a Thursday morning I left Tours by the barrier of
Saint-Eloy, crossed the bridges of Saint-Sauveur, reached Poncher whose
every house I examined, and took the road to Chinon. For the first
time in my life I could sit down under a tree or walk fast or slow as
I pleased without being dictated to by any one. To a poor lad crushed
under all sorts of despotism (which more or less does weigh upon all
youth) the first employment of freedom, even though it be expended upon
nothing, lifts the soul with irrepressible buoyancy. Several reasons
combined to make that day one of enchantment. During my school years I
had never been taken to walk more than two or three miles from a city;
yet there remained in my mind among the earliest recollections of my
childhood that feeling for the beautiful which the scenery about Tours
inspires. Though quite untaught as to the poetry of such a landscape,
I was, unknown to myself, critical upon it, like those who imagine the
ideal of art without knowing anything of its practice.

To reach the chateau of Frapesle, foot-passengers, or those
on horseback, shorten the way by crossing the Charlemagne
moors,--uncultivated tracts of land lying on the summit of the plateau
which separates the valley of the Cher from that of the Indre, and over
which there is a cross-road leading to Champy. These moors are flat and
sandy, and for more than three miles are dreary enough until you reach,
through a clump of woods, the road to Sache, the name of the township
in which Frapesle stands. This road, which joins that of Chinon beyond
Ballan, skirts an undulating plain to the little hamlet of Artanne. Here
we come upon a valley, which begins at Montbazon, ends at the Loire,
and seems to rise and fall,--to bound, as it were,--beneath the chateaus
placed on its double hillsides,--a splendid emerald cup, in the depths
of which flow the serpentine lines of the river Indre. I gazed at this
scene with ineffable delight, for which the gloomy moor-land and the
fatigue of the sandy walk had prepared me.

“If that woman, the flower of her sex, does indeed inhabit this earth,
she is here, on this spot.”

Thus musing, I leaned against a walnut-tree, beneath which I have rested
from that day to this whenever I return to my dear valley. Beneath that
tree, the confidant of my thoughts, I ask myself what changes there are
in me since last I stood there.

My heart deceived me not--she lived there; the first castle that I saw
on the slope of a hill was the dwelling that held her. As I sat beneath
my nut-tree, the mid-day sun was sparkling on the slates of her roof and
the panes of her windows. Her cambric dress made the white line which I
saw among the vines of an arbor. She was, as you know already without
as yet knowing anything, the Lily of this valley, where she grew for
heaven, filling it with the fragrance of her virtues. Love, infinite
love, without other sustenance than the vision, dimly seen, of which my
soul was full, was there, expressed to me by that long ribbon of water
flowing in the sunshine between the grass-green banks, by the lines of
the poplars adorning with their mobile laces that vale of love, by the
oak-woods coming down between the vineyards to the shore, which the
river curved and rounded as it chose, and by those dim varying horizons
as they fled confusedly away.

If you would see nature beautiful and virgin as a bride, go there of a
spring morning. If you would still the bleeding wounds of your heart,
return in the last days of autumn. In the spring, Love beats his wings
beneath the broad blue sky; in the autumn, we think of those who are no
more. The lungs diseased breathe in a blessed purity; the eyes will rest
on golden copses which impart to the soul their peaceful stillness. At
this moment, when I stood there for the first time, the mills upon
the brooksides gave a voice to the quivering valley; the poplars were
laughing as they swayed; not a cloud was in the sky; the birds sang,
the crickets chirped,--all was melody. Do not ask me again why I love
Touraine. I love it, not as we love our cradle, not as we love the oasis
in a desert; I love it as an artist loves art; I love it less than I
love you; but without Touraine, perhaps I might not now be living.

Without knowing why, my eyes reverted ever to that white spot, to the
woman who shone in that garden as the bell of a convolvulus shines amid
the underbrush, and wilts if touched. Moved to the soul, I descended
the slope and soon saw a village, which the superabounding poetry that
filled my heart made me fancy without an equal. Imagine three mills
placed among islands of graceful outline crowned with groves of trees
and rising from a field of water,--for what other name can I give to
that aquatic vegetation, so verdant, so finely colored, which carpeted
the river, rose above its surface and undulated upon it, yielding to its
caprices and swaying to the turmoil of the water when the mill-wheels
lashed it. Here and there were mounds of gravel, against which the
wavelets broke in fringes that shimmered in the sunlight. Amaryllis,
water-lilies, reeds, and phloxes decorated the banks with their glorious
tapestry. A trembling bridge of rotten planks, the abutments swathed
with flowers, and the hand-rails green with perennials and velvet
mosses drooping to the river but not falling to it; mouldering boats,
fishing-nets; the monotonous sing-song of a shepherd; ducks paddling
among the islands or preening on the “jard,”--a name given to the coarse
sand which the Loire brings down; the millers, with their caps over
one ear, busily loading their mules,--all these details made the scene
before me one of primitive simplicity. Imagine, also, beyond the bridge
two or three farm-houses, a dove-cote, turtle-doves, thirty or more
dilapidated cottages, separated by gardens, by hedges of honeysuckle,
clematis, and jasmine; a dunghill beside each door, and cocks and hens
about the road. Such is the village of Pont-de-Ruan, a picturesque
little hamlet leading up to an old church full of character, a church
of the days of the Crusades, such a one as painters desire for their
pictures. Surround this scene with ancient walnut-trees and slim young
poplars with their pale-gold leaves; dot graceful buildings here and
there along the grassy slopes where sight is lost beneath the vaporous,
warm sky, and you will have some idea of one of the points of view of
this most lovely region.

I followed the road to Sache along the left bank of the river, noticing
carefully the details of the hills on the opposite shore. At length I
reached a park embellished with centennial trees, which I knew to be
that of Frapesle. I arrived just as the bell was ringing for breakfast.
After the meal, my host, who little suspected that I had walked from
Tours, carried me over his estate, from the borders of which I saw the
valley on all sides under its many aspects,--here through a vista, there
to its broad extent; often my eyes were drawn to the horizon along the
golden blade of the Loire, where the sails made fantastic figures among
the currents as they flew before the wind. As we mounted a crest I
came in sight of the chateau d’Azay, like a diamond of many facets in
a setting of the Indre, standing on wooden piles concealed by flowers.
Farther on, in a hollow, I saw the romantic masses of the chateau
of Sache, a sad retreat though full of harmony; too sad for the
superficial, but dear to a poet with a soul in pain. I, too, came to
love its silence, its great gnarled trees, and the nameless mysterious
influence of its solitary valley. But now, each time that we reached
an opening towards the neighboring slope which gave to view the pretty
castle I had first noticed in the morning, I stopped to look at it with
pleasure.

“Hey!” said my host, reading in my eyes the sparkling desires which
youth so ingenuously betrays, “so you scent from afar a pretty woman as
a dog scents game!”

I did not like the speech, but I asked the name of the castle and of its
owner.

“It is Clochegourde,” he replied; “a pretty house belonging to the Comte
de Mortsauf, the head of an historic family in Touraine, whose fortune
dates from the days of Louis XI., and whose name tells the story to
which they owe their arms and their distinction. Monsieur de Mortsauf
is descended from a man who survived the gallows. The family bear: Or,
a cross potent and counter-potent sable, charged with a fleur-de-lis or;
and ‘Dieu saulve le Roi notre Sire,’ for motto. The count settled here
after the return of the emigration. The estate belongs to his wife, a
demoiselle de Lenoncourt, of the house of Lenoncourt-Givry which is now
dying out. Madame de Mortsauf is an only daughter. The limited fortune
of the family contrasts strangely with the distinction of their names;
either from pride, or, possibly, from necessity, they never leave
Clochegourde and see no company. Until now their attachment to the
Bourbons explained this retirement, but the return of the king has not
changed their way of living. When I came to reside here last year I paid
them a visit of courtesy; they returned it and invited us to dinner; the
winter separated us for some months, and political events kept me away
from Frapesle until recently. Madame de Mortsauf is a woman who would
hold the highest position wherever she might be.”

“Does she often come to Tours?”

“She never goes there. However,” he added, correcting himself, “she did
go there lately to the ball given to the Duc d’Angouleme, who was very
gracious to her husband.”

“It was she!” I exclaimed.

“She! who?”

“A woman with beautiful shoulders.”

“You will meet a great many women with beautiful shoulders in Touraine,”
 he said, laughing. “But if you are not tired we can cross the river
and call at Clochegourde and you shall renew acquaintance with those
particular shoulders.”

I agreed, not without a blush of shame and pleasure. About four o’clock
we reached the little chateau on which my eyes had fastened from the
first. The building, which is finely effective in the landscape, is in
reality very modest. It has five windows on the front; those at each
end of the facade, looking south, project about twelve feet,--an
architectural device which gives the idea of two towers and adds grace
to the structure. The middle window serves as a door from which you
descend through a double portico into a terraced garden which joins the
narrow strip of grass-land that skirts the Indre along its whole course.
Though this meadow is separated from the lower terrace, which is shaded
by a double line of acacias and Japanese ailanthus, by the country road,
it nevertheless appears from the house to be a part of the garden, for
the road is sunken and hemmed in on one side by the terrace, on the
other side by a Norman hedge. The terraces being very well managed
put enough distance between the house and the river to avoid the
inconvenience of too great proximity to water, without losing the charms
of it. Below the house are the stables, coach-house, green-houses,
and kitchen, the various openings to which form an arcade. The roof is
charmingly rounded at the angles, and bears mansarde windows with carved
mullions and leaden finials on their gables. This roof, no doubt much
neglected during the Revolution, is stained by a sort of mildew produced
by lichens and the reddish moss which grows on houses exposed to the
sun. The glass door of the portico is surmounted by a little tower
which holds the bell, and on which is carved the escutcheon of the
Blamont-Chauvry family, to which Madame de Mortsauf belonged, as
follows: Gules, a pale vair, flanked quarterly by two hands clasped or,
and two lances in chevron sable. The motto, “Voyez tous, nul ne touche!”
 struck me greatly. The supporters, a griffin and dragon gules, enchained
or, made a pretty effect in the carving. The Revolution has damaged the
ducal crown and the crest, which was a palm-tree vert with fruit or.
Senart, the secretary of the committee of public safety was bailiff of
Sache before 1781, which explains this destruction.

These arrangements give an elegant air to the little castle, dainty as
a flower, which seems to scarcely rest upon the earth. Seen from the
valley the ground-floor appears to be the first story; but on the
other side it is on a level with a broad gravelled path leading to a
grass-plot, on which are several flower-beds. To right and left are
vineyards, orchards, and a few acres of tilled land planted with
chestnut-trees which surround the house, the ground falling rapidly to
the Indre, where other groups of trees of variegated shades of green,
chosen by Nature herself, are spread along the shore. I admired these
groups, so charmingly disposed, as we mounted the hilly road which
borders Clochegourde; I breathed an atmosphere of happiness. Has
the moral nature, like the physical nature, its own electrical
communications and its rapid changes of temperature? My heart was
beating at the approach of events then unrevealed which were to change
it forever, just as animals grow livelier when foreseeing fine weather.

This day, so marked in my life, lacked no circumstance that was needed
to solemnize it. Nature was adorned like a woman to meet her lover.
My soul heard her voice for the first time; my eyes worshipped her,
as fruitful, as varied as my imagination had pictured her in those
school-dreams the influence of which I have tried in a few unskilful
words to explain to you, for they were to me an Apocalypse in which my
life was figuratively foretold; each event, fortunate or unfortunate,
being mated to some one of these strange visions by ties known only to
the soul.

We crossed a court-yard surrounded by buildings necessary for the farm
work,--a barn, a wine-press, cow-sheds, and stables. Warned by the
barking of the watch-dog, a servant came to meet us, saying that
Monsieur le comte had gone to Azay in the morning but would soon return,
and that Madame la comtesse was at home. My companion looked at me. I
fairly trembled lest he should decline to see Madame de Mortsauf in
her husband’s absence; but he told the man to announce us. With the
eagerness of a child I rushed into the long antechamber which crosses
the whole house.

“Come in, gentlemen,” said a golden voice.

Though Madame de Mortsauf had spoken only one word at the ball, I
recognized her voice, which entered my soul and filled it as a ray of
sunshine fills and gilds a prisoner’s dungeon. Thinking, suddenly, that
she might remember my face, my first impulse was to fly; but it was too
late,--she appeared in the doorway, and our eyes met. I know not which
of us blushed deepest. Too much confused for immediate speech she
returned to her seat at an embroidery frame while the servant placed two
chairs, then she drew out her needle and counted some stitches, as if
to explain her silence; after which she raised her head, gently yet
proudly, in the direction of Monsieur de Chessel as she asked to what
fortunate circumstance she owed his visit. Though curious to know the
secret of my unexpected appearance, she looked at neither of us,--her
eyes were fixed on the river; and yet you could have told by the way she
listened that she was able to recognize, as the blind do, the agitations
of a neighboring soul by the imperceptible inflexions of the voice.

Monsieur de Chessel gave my name and biography. I had lately arrived
at Tours, where my parents had recalled me when the armies threatened
Paris. A son of Touraine to whom Touraine was as yet unknown, she would
find me a young man weakened by excessive study and sent to Frapesle to
amuse himself; he had already shown me his estate, which I saw for
the first time. I had just told him that I had walked from Tours to
Frapesle, and fearing for my health--which was really delicate--he had
stopped at Clochegourde to ask her to allow me to rest there. Monsieur
de Chessel told the truth; but the accident seemed so forced that Madame
de Mortsauf distrusted us. She gave me a cold, severe glance, under
which my own eyelids fell, as much from a sense of humiliation as
to hide the tears that rose beneath them. She saw the moisture on my
forehead, and perhaps she guessed the tears; for she offered me the
restoratives I needed, with a few kind and consoling words, which gave
me back the power of speech. I blushed like a young girl, and in a voice
as tremulous as that of an old man I thanked her and declined.

“All I ask,” I said, raising my eyes to hers, which mine now met for the
second time in a glance as rapid as lightning,--“is to rest here. I am
so crippled with fatigue I really cannot walk farther.”

“You must not doubt the hospitality of our beautiful Touraine,” she
said; then, turning to my companion, she added: “You will give us the
pleasure of your dining at Clochegourde?”

I threw such a look of entreaty at Monsieur de Chessel that he began
the preliminaries of accepting the invitation, though it was given in
a manner that seemed to expect a refusal. As a man of the world,
he recognized these shades of meaning; but I, a young man without
experience, believed so implicitly in the sincerity between word and
thought of this beautiful woman that I was wholly astonished when my
host said to me, after we reached home that evening, “I stayed because I
saw you were dying to do so; but if you do not succeed in making it
all right, I may find myself on bad terms with my neighbors.” That
expression, “if you do not make it all right,” made me ponder the matter
deeply. In other words, if I pleased Madame de Mortsauf, she would
not be displeased with the man who introduced me to her. He evidently
thought I had the power to please her; this in itself gave me that
power, and corroborated my inward hope at a moment when it needed some
outward succor.

“I am afraid it will be difficult,” he began; “Madame de Chessel expects
us.”

“She has you every day,” replied the countess; “besides, we can send her
word. Is she alone?”

“No, the Abbe de Quelus is there.”

“Well, then,” she said, rising to ring the bell, “you really must dine
with us.”

This time Monsieur de Chessel thought her in earnest, and gave me a
congratulatory look. As soon as I was sure of passing a whole evening
under that roof I seemed to have eternity before me. For many miserable
beings to-morrow is a word without meaning, and I was of the number who
had no faith in it; when I was certain of a few hours of happiness I
made them contain a whole lifetime of delight.

Madame de Mortsauf talked about local affairs, the harvest, the vintage,
and other matters to which I was a total stranger. This usually argues
either a want of breeding or great contempt for the stranger present
who is thus shut out from the conversation, but in this case it was
embarrassment. Though at first I thought she treated me as a child and
I envied the man of thirty to whom she talked of serious matters which
I could not comprehend, I came, a few months later, to understand how
significant a woman’s silence often is, and how many thoughts a voluble
conversation masks. At first I attempted to be at my ease and take part
in it, then I perceived the advantages of my situation and gave myself
up to the charm of listening to Madame de Mortsauf’s voice. The breath
of her soul rose and fell among the syllables as sound is divided by the
notes of a flute; it died away to the ear as it quickened the pulsation
of the blood. Her way of uttering the terminations in “i” was like a
bird’s song; the “ch” as she said it was a kiss, but the “t’s” were
an echo of her heart’s despotism. She thus extended, without herself
knowing that she did so, the meaning of her words, leading the soul of
the listener into regions above this earth. Many a time I have continued
a discussion I could easily have ended, many a time I have allowed
myself to be unjustly scolded that I might listen to those harmonies of
the human voice, that I might breathe the air of her soul as it left
her lips, and strain to my soul that spoken light as I would fain have
strained the speaker to my breast. A swallow’s song of joy it was when
she was gay!--but when she spoke of her griefs, a swan’s voice calling
to its mates!

Madame de Mortsauf’s inattention to my presence enabled me to examine
her. My eyes rejoiced as they glided over the sweet speaker; they kissed
her feet, they clasped her waist, they played with the ringlets of her
hair. And yet I was a prey to terror, as all who, once in their lives,
have experienced the illimitable joys of a true passion will understand.
I feared she would detect me if I let my eyes rest upon the shoulder I
had kissed, and the fear sharpened the temptation. I yielded, I looked,
my eyes tore away the covering; I saw the mole which lay where the
pretty line between the shoulders started, and which, ever since the
ball, had sparkled in that twilight which seems the region of the sleep
of youths whose imagination is ardent and whose life is chaste.

I can sketch for you the leading features which all eyes saw in Madame
de Mortsauf; but no drawing, however correct, no color, however warm,
can represent her to you. Her face was of those that require the
unattainable artist, whose hand can paint the reflection of inward
fires and render that luminous vapor which defies science and is not
revealable by language--but which a lover sees. Her soft, fair hair
often caused her much suffering, no doubt through sudden rushes of blood
to the head. Her brow, round and prominent like that of Joconda, teemed
with unuttered thoughts, restrained feelings--flowers drowning in bitter
waters. The eyes, of a green tinge flecked with brown, were always wan;
but if her children were in question, or if some keen condition of joy
or suffering (rare in the lives of all resigned women) seized her, those
eyes sent forth a subtile gleam as if from fires that were consuming
her,--the gleam that wrung the tears from mine when she covered me with
her contempt, and which sufficed to lower the boldest eyelid. A Grecian
nose, designed it might be by Phidias, and united by its double arch to
lips that were gracefully curved, spiritualized the face, which was
oval with a skin of the texture of a white camellia colored with soft
rose-tints upon the cheeks. Her plumpness did not detract from the
grace of her figure nor from the rounded outlines which made her shape
beautiful though well developed. You will understand the character of
this perfection when I say that where the dazzling treasures which
had so fascinated me joined the arm there was no crease or wrinkle. No
hollow disfigured the base of her head, like those which make the necks
of some women resemble trunks of trees; her muscles were not harshly
defined, and everywhere the lines were rounded into curves as fugitive
to the eye as to the pencil. A soft down faintly showed upon her cheeks
and on the outline of her throat, catching the light which made it
silken. Her little ears, perfect in shape, were, as she said herself,
the ears of a mother and a slave. In after days, when our hearts were
one, she would say to me, “Here comes Monsieur de Mortsauf”; and she was
right, though I, whose hearing is remarkably acute, could hear nothing.

Her arms were beautiful. The curved fingers of the hand were long, and
the flesh projected at the side beyond the finger-nails, like those
of antique statues. I should displease you, I know, if you were not
yourself an exception to my rule, when I say that flat waists should
have the preference over round ones. The round waist is a sign of
strength; but women thus formed are imperious, self-willed, and more
voluptuous than tender. On the other hand, women with flat waists are
devoted in soul, delicately perceptive, inclined to sadness, more truly
woman than the other class. The flat waist is supple and yielding; the
round waist is inflexible and jealous.

You now know how she was made. She had the foot of a well-bred
woman,--the foot that walks little, is quickly tired, and delights the
eye when it peeps beneath the dress. Though she was the mother of two
children, I have never met any woman so truly a young girl as she. Her
whole air was one of simplicity, joined to a certain bashful dreaminess
which attracted others, just as a painter arrests our steps before a
figure into which his genius has conveyed a world of sentiment. If you
recall the pure, wild fragrance of the heath we gathered on our return
from the Villa Diodati, the flower whose tints of black and rose you
praised so warmly, you can fancy how this woman could be elegant though
remote from the social world, natural in expression, fastidious in
all things which became part of herself,--in short, like the heath of
mingled colors. Her body had the freshness we admire in the unfolding
leaf; her spirit the clear conciseness of the aboriginal mind; she was a
child by feeling, grave through suffering, the mistress of a household,
yet a maiden too. Therefore she charmed artlessly and unconsciously,
by her way of sitting down or rising, of throwing in a word or keeping
silence. Though habitually collected, watchful as the sentinel on
whom the safety of others depends and who looks for danger, there were
moments when smiles would wreathe her lips and betray the happy nature
buried beneath the saddened bearing that was the outcome of her life.
Her gift of attraction was mysterious. Instead of inspiring the gallant
attentions which other women seek, she made men dream, letting them see
her virginal nature of pure flame, her celestial visions, as we see the
azure heavens through rifts in the clouds. This involuntary revelation
of her being made others thoughtful. The rarity of her gestures, above
all, the rarity of her glances--for, excepting her children, she seldom
looked at any one--gave a strange solemnity to all she said and did when
her words or actions seemed to her to compromise her dignity.

On this particular morning Madame de Mortsauf wore a rose-colored gown
patterned in tiny stripes, a collar with a wide hem, a black belt, and
little boots of the same hue. Her hair was simply twisted round her
head, and held in place by a tortoise-shell comb. Such, my dear Natalie,
is the imperfect sketch I promised you. But the constant emanation of
her soul upon her family, that nurturing essence shed in floods around
her as the sun emits its light, her inward nature, her cheerfulness on
days serene, her resignation on stormy ones,--all those variations of
expression by which character is displayed depend, like the effects
in the sky, on unexpected and fugitive circumstances, which have no
connection with each other except the background against which they
rest, though all are necessarily mingled with the events of this
history,--truly a household epic, as great to the eyes of a wise man as
a tragedy to the eyes of the crowd, an epic in which you will feel an
interest, not only for the part I took in it, but for the likeness that
it bears to the destinies of so vast a number of women.

Everything at Clochegourde bore signs of a truly English cleanliness.
The room in which the countess received us was panelled throughout and
painted in two shades of gray. The mantelpiece was ornamented with a
clock inserted in a block of mahogany and surmounted with a tazza, and
two large vases of white porcelain with gold lines, which held bunches
of Cape heather. A lamp was on a pier-table, and a backgammon board on
legs before the fireplace. Two wide bands of cotton held back the white
cambric curtains, which had no fringe. The furniture was covered with
gray cotton bound with a green braid, and the tapestry on the countess’s
frame told why the upholstery was thus covered. Such simplicity rose to
grandeur. No apartment, among all that I have seen since, has given me
such fertile, such teeming impressions as those that filled my mind
in that salon of Clochegourde, calm and composed as the life of its
mistress, where the conventual regularity of her occupations made itself
felt. The greater part of my ideas in science or politics, even the
boldest of them, were born in that room, as perfumes emanate from
flowers; there grew the mysterious plant that cast upon my soul its
fructifying pollen; there glowed the solar warmth which developed my
good and shrivelled my evil qualities. Through the windows the eye took
in the valley from the heights of Pont-de-Ruan to the chateau d’Azay,
following the windings of the further shore, picturesquely varied by the
towers of Frapesle, the church, the village, and the old manor-house of
Sache, whose venerable pile looked down upon the meadows.

In harmony with this reposeful life, and without other excitements to
emotion than those arising in the family, this scene conveyed to the
soul its own serenity. If I had met her there for the first time,
between the count and her two children, instead of seeing her
resplendent in a ball dress, I should not have ravished that delirious
kiss, which now filled me with remorse and with the fear of having lost
the future of my love. No; in the gloom of my unhappy life I should have
bent my knee and kissed the hem of her garment, wetting it with tears,
and then I might have flung myself into the Indre. But having breathed
the jasmine perfume of her skin and drunk the milk of that cup of love,
my soul had acquired the knowledge and the hope of human joys; I would
live and await the coming of happiness as the savage awaits his hour of
vengeance; I longed to climb those trees, to creep among the vines, to
float in the river; I wanted the companionship of night and its silence,
I needed lassitude of body, I craved the heat of the sun to make the
eating of the delicious apple into which I had bitten perfect. Had she
asked of me the singing flower, the riches buried by the comrades of
Morgan the destroyer, I would have sought them, to obtain those other
riches and that mute flower for which I longed.

When my dream, the dream into which this first contemplation of my
idol plunged me, came to an end and I heard her speaking of Monsieur de
Mortsauf, the thought came that a woman must belong to her husband, and
a raging curiosity possessed me to see the owner of this treasure. Two
emotions filled my mind, hatred and fear,--hatred which allowed of no
obstacles and measured all without shrinking, and a vague, but real fear
of the struggle, of its issue, and above all of _her_.

“Here is Monsieur de Mortsauf,” she said.

I sprang to my feet like a startled horse. Though the movement was seen
by Monsieur de Chessel and the countess, neither made any observation,
for a diversion was effected at this moment by the entrance of a little
girl, whom I took to be about six years old, who came in exclaiming,
“Here’s papa!”

“Madeleine?” said her mother, gently.

The child at once held out her hand to Monsieur de Chessel, and looked
attentively at me after making a little bow with an air of astonishment.

“Are you more satisfied about her health?” asked Monsieur de Chessel.

“She is better,” replied the countess, caressing the little head which
was already nestling in her lap.

The next question of Monsieur de Chessel let me know that Madeleine
was nine years old; I showed great surprise, and immediately the clouds
gathered on the mother’s brow. My companion threw me a significant
look,--one of those which form the education of men of the world. I had
stumbled no doubt upon some maternal wound the covering of which should
have been respected. The sickly child, whose eyes were pallid and
whose skin was white as a porcelain vase with a light within it, would
probably not have lived in the atmosphere of a city. Country air and her
mother’s brooding care had kept the life in that frail body, delicate
as a hot-house plant growing in a harsh and foreign climate. Though in
nothing did she remind me of her mother, Madeleine seemed to have her
soul, and that soul held her up. Her hair was scanty and black, her eyes
and cheeks hollow, her arms thin, her chest narrow, showing a battle
between life and death, a duel without truce in which the mother had
so far been victorious. The child willed to live,--perhaps to spare her
mother, for at times, when not observed, she fell into the attitude of
a weeping-willow. You might have thought her a little gypsy dying of
hunger, begging her way, exhausted but always brave and dressed up to
play her part.

“Where have you left Jacques?” asked the countess, kissing the white
line which parted the child’s hair into two bands that looked like a
crow’s wings.

“He is coming with papa.”

Just then the count entered, holding his son by the hand. Jacques, the
image of his sister, showed the same signs of weakness. Seeing these
sickly children beside a mother so magnificently healthy it was
impossible not to guess at the causes of the grief which clouded her
brow and kept her silent on a subject she could take to God only. As
he bowed, Monsieur de Mortsauf gave me a glance that was less observing
than awkwardly uneasy,--the glance of a man whose distrust grows out
of his inability to analyze. After explaining the circumstances of our
visit, and naming me to him, the countess gave him her place and left
the room. The children, whose eyes were on those of their mother as if
they drew the light of theirs from hers, tried to follow her; but she
said, with a finger on her lips, “Stay dears!” and they obeyed, but
their eyes filled. Ah! to hear that one word “dears” what tasks they
would have undertaken!

Like the children, I felt less warm when she had left us. My name seemed
to change the count’s feeling toward me. Cold and supercilious in his
first glance, he became at once, if not affectionate, at least politely
attentive, showing me every consideration and seeming pleased to receive
me as a guest. My father had formerly done devoted service to the
Bourbons, and had played an important and perilous, though secret part.
When their cause was lost by the elevation of Napoleon, he took
refuge in the quietude of the country and domestic life, accepting the
unmerited accusations that followed him as the inevitable reward of
those who risk all to win all, and who succumb after serving as pivot to
the political machine. Knowing nothing of the fortunes, nor of the past,
nor of the future of my family, I was unaware of this devoted service
which the Comte de Mortsauf well remembered. Moreover, the antiquity of
our name, the most precious quality of a man in his eyes, added to the
warmth of his greeting. I knew nothing of these reasons until later; for
the time being the sudden transition to cordiality put me at my ease.
When the two children saw that we were all three fairly engaged in
conversation, Madeleine slipped her head from her father’s hand, glanced
at the open door, and glided away like an eel, Jacques following
her. They rejoined their mother, and I heard their voices and their
movements, sounding in the distance like the murmur of bees about a
hive.

I watched the count, trying to guess his character, but I became so
interested in certain leading traits that I got no further than
a superficial examination of his personality. Though he was only
forty-five years old, he seemed nearer sixty, so much had the great
shipwreck at the close of the eighteenth century aged him. The crescent
of hair which monastically fringed the back of his head, otherwise
completely bald, ended at the ears in little tufts of gray mingled with
black. His face bore a vague resemblance to that of a white wolf with
blood about its muzzle, for his nose was inflamed and gave signs of a
life poisoned at its springs and vitiated by diseases of long standing.
His flat forehead, too broad for the face beneath it, which ended in a
point, and transversely wrinkled in crooked lines, gave signs of a life
in the open air, but not of any mental activity; it also showed the
burden of constant misfortunes, but not of any efforts made to surmount
them. His cheekbones, which were brown and prominent amid the general
pallor of his skin, showed a physical structure which was likely to
ensure him a long life. His hard, light-yellow eye fell upon mine like
a ray of wintry sun, bright without warmth, anxious without thought,
distrustful without conscious cause. His mouth was violent and
domineering, his chin flat and long. Thin and very tall, he had the
bearing of a gentleman who relies upon the conventional value of his
caste, who knows himself above others by right, and beneath them in
fact. The carelessness of country life had made him neglect his external
appearance. His dress was that of a country-man whom peasants and
neighbors no longer considered except for his territorial worth. His
brown and wiry hands showed that he wore no gloves unless he mounted a
horse, or went to church, and his shoes were thick and common.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Though ten years of emigration and ten more of farm-life had changed his physical condition, he still retained certain vestiges of nobility. Even the bitterest liberal would have admitted his chivalric loyalty and the imperishable convictions of one who puts his faith to the "Quotidienne"; he was devoted to a cause, honest in his political antipathies, incapable of serving his party but very capable of injuring it, and without the slightest real knowledge of the affairs of France. The count was one of those upright men who are available for nothing, who stand obstinately in the way of all; ready to die under arms at the post assigned to them, but preferring to give their life rather than their money.

During dinner I detected, in the hanging of his flaccid cheeks and the covert glances he cast upon his children, traces of some wearing thought. Watching him, who could fail to understand him? Who would not have seen that he had fatally transmitted to his children those weakly bodies in which the principle of life was lacking? If he blamed himself he denied others the right to judge him. Harsh as one who knows himself in fault, yet without greatness of soul or charm to compensate for the weight of misery he had thrown into the balance, his private life was no doubt the scene of irascibilities shown in his angular features and the restlessness of his eye. When his wife returned, followed by the children clinging to her, I felt the presence of unhappiness, as if walking over the roof of a vault one becomes conscious of the depths below. Seeing these four human beings together, letting my eye pass from one to the other, thoughts steeped in sadness fell upon my heart as a fine gray rain dims a landscape after the sun has risen clear.

When the immediate subject of conversation was exhausted the count told his wife who I was, and related certain circumstances connected with my family that were wholly unknown to me. He asked my age. When I told it, the countess echoed my exclamation of surprise at her daughter’s age. Perhaps she had thought me fifteen. Later I discovered that this was another tie that bound her strongly to me. Even then I read her soul. Her motherhood quivered with a tardy ray of hope. Seeing me over twenty yet so slight and delicate and nervously strong, a voice cried to her, “They too will live!” She looked at me searchingly, and in that moment I felt the barriers of ice melting between us. She seemed to have many questions to ask, but asked none.

“If study has made you ill,” she said, “the air of our valley will soon restore you.”

“Modern education is fatal to children,” remarked the count. “We stuff them with mathematics and ruin their health with sciences, make them old before their time. You must stay and rest here,” he added, turning to me. “You are crushed by the avalanche of ideas that have rolled down upon you. What sort of future will this universal education bring unless we prevent its evils by replacing public education in the hands of the religious bodies?”

These words were in harmony with a speech he afterwards made at the elections when he refused his support to a man whose gifts would have served the royalist cause. “I shall always distrust men of talent,” he said.

Presently the count proposed a tour of the gardens.

“Monsieur--” said his wife.

“Well, what, my dear?” he said, turning to her with an arrogant harshness that showed how absolute he chose to be in his own home.

“Monsieur de Vandenesse walked from Tours this morning and Monsieur de Chessel, not aware of it, has already taken him on foot over Frapesle.”

“Very imprudent of you,” the count said, turning to me; “but at your age--” and he shook his head.

The conversation resumed. I soon saw how intractable his royalism was, and how much care was needed to swim safely in his waters. The man-servant, now in livery, announced dinner. Monsieur de Chessel gave his arm to Madame de Mortsauf, and the count gaily seized mine to lead me into the dining-room on the ground-floor facing the salon.

This room, floored with white tiles made in Touraine and wainscoted to three feet, was hung with varnished paper divided into wide panels by wreaths of flowers and fruit; the windows had cambric curtains trimmed with red; the buffets were old pieces by Boulle, and the chairs, covered by hand-made tapestry, had carved oak. The dinner, plentiful but not luxurious; family silver without uniformity, Dresden china, octagonal decanters, knives with agate handles, and lacquered trays beneath the wine-bottles were chief features, while flowers adorned the porcelain vases. I delighted in these quaint old things. My delight hid the obstacles that a uniform country life placed between her and me. I was near her, sitting at her right hand, serving her with wine. Yes, unhoped-for joy! I touched her dress, I ate her bread. In three hours my life had mingled with hers! That terrible kiss had bound us in a secret that inspired mutual shame. A glorious self-abasement took possession of me. I studied to please the count, fondled the dogs, would gladly have gratified the children, brought them hoops and marbles and played horse; I was even provoked that they did not already claim me as their own. Love has intuitions like genius; I dimly perceived that gloom, discontent, hostility would destroy my footing in that household.

The dinner passed with inward happiness. Feeling that I was under her roof, I gave no heed to her obvious coldness nor to the count’s indifference masked by politeness. Love, like life, has an adolescence during which it suffices unto itself. I made several stupid replies induced by passion, but no one perceived their cause, not even SHE, who knew nothing of love. The rest of my visit was a dream, which did not cease until by moonlight on that warm night I recrossed the Indre, watching white visions that embellished meadows, shores, and hills, and listening to the clear song, full of melancholy, of a tree-frog. Since that evening I have never heard it without delight. A sense came to me then of the marble wall against which my feelings had dashed. Would it be always so? I fancied myself under a fatal spell; unhappy events of my past rose and struggled with the personal pleasure I had enjoyed. Before reaching Frapesle I turned to look at Clochegourde and saw beneath its windows a little punt fastened to an ash-tree and swaying on the water. This punt belonged to Monsieur de Mortsauf, who used it for fishing.

“Well,” said Monsieur de Chessel, when we were out of ear-shot. “I needn’t ask if you found those shoulders; I must, however, congratulate you on the reception Monsieur de Mortsauf gave you. The devil! you stepped into his heart at once.”

These words, followed by those I have already quoted, raised my spirits. I had not yet said a word, and Monsieur de Chessel may have attributed my silence to happiness.

“How do you mean?” I asked.

“He never, to my knowledge, received any one so well.”

“I will admit that I am rather surprised myself,” I said, conscious of a certain bitterness underlying my companion’s speech.

Though inexpert in social matters, I was much struck by Monsieur de Chessel’s feeling. His real name was Durand, but he had had the weakness to discard the name of a worthy father, a merchant who had made a large fortune under the Revolution. His wife was sole heiress of the Chessels, an old parliamentary family. Ambitious, Monsieur de Chessel smothered the original Durand. He first called himself Durand de Chessel, then D. de Chessel, and that made him Monsieur de Chessel. Under the Restoration he entailed an estate with the title of count in virtue of letters-patent from Louis XVIII. His children reaped the fruits of his audacity without knowing what it cost him in sarcastic comments. Parvenus are like monkeys: clever in climbing, absurd at the summit. The reverse side of my host’s character was pettiness with envy. The peerage and he were on diverging lines. To have an ambition and gratify it shows the insolence of strength, but to live below avowed ambition is a source of ridicule to petty minds. Monsieur de Chessel did not advance straightforwardly. Twice elected deputy and twice defeated; yesterday director-general, to-day nothing at all; his successes and defeats had made him sour. Though brave and witty and capable of great things, envy—root of existence in Touraine—injured him in upper circles, where a dissatisfied man, frowning at others’ success, slow at compliments and ready at epigram, seldom succeeds. Had he sought less he might perhaps have obtained more; but he had enough genuine superiority to make him wish to advance his way.

At this time Monsieur de Chessel’s ambition had a second dawn. Royalty smiled upon him, and he affected the grand manner. Still he was kind to me, and pleased me because with him I found peace and rest for the first time. The interest, however slight, which he showed in my affairs, seemed to me an image of paternal love. His hospitable care contrasted with my usual neglect, so I felt childish gratitude to the home where no fetters bound me and where I was welcomed and even courted.

The owners of Frapesle are associated with the dawn of my life’s happiness, so I mingle them in memories I love to revive. Later, in connection with his letters-patent, I had the pleasure of doing my host some service. Monsieur de Chessel enjoyed his wealth with an ostentation that gave umbrage to neighbors. He could vary his horses and equipages; his wife dressed exquisitely; he received on a grand scale; his servants were more numerous than neighbors approved; for which he was said to be aping princes. The Frapesle estate is immense. Before such luxury the Comte de Mortsauf, with one family cariole—something between a coach without springs and a post-chaise—forced by limited means to let or farm Clochegourde, was Tourangean up to the time when royal favor restored the family to a distinction unlooked for. His greeting to me, the younger son of a ruined family whose escutcheon dated to the Crusades, was intended to show contempt for a neighbor not of noble birth. Monsieur de Chessel understood this. They always met politely; but there was none of that daily intercourse or agreeable intimacy that ought to have existed between Clochegourde and Frapesle, two estates separated only by the Indre, whose mistresses could have beckoned from their windows.

Jealousy, however, was not the sole reason for the Count de Mortsauf’s solitude. His early education was that of children of great families—an incomplete instruction as to knowledge, but supplemented by the training of society and the exercise of duties under the crown. Monsieur de Mortsauf had emigrated when the second stage of his education was about to begin, and that training was lacking. He believed in the immediate restoration of the monarchy; with that conviction his exile was a long idleness. When the army of Condé, which his courage led him to join, was disbanded, he expected to find another post under the white flag, and never sought, like other emigrants, an industry. Perhaps he lacked courage to lay aside his name and earn his living in toil he despised. His hopes, daily postponed, and perhaps a scruple of honor, kept him from offering his services to foreign powers. Trials undermined his courage. Long tramps on insufficient nourishment, and above all hopes betrayed, injured his health and discouraged his mind. By degrees he became utterly destitute. If to some misery is tonic, on others it acts as a dissolvent; the count was of the latter.

Reflecting on this Touraine gentleman, tramping and sleeping along the highroads of Hungary, sharing the mutton of Prince Esterházy’s shepherds and refusing service to France’s enemies, I never found it in my heart to feel bitterness against him, even when I saw him at his worst. The natural gaiety of a Frenchman soon deserted him; he became morose, fell ill, and was charitably cared for in some German hospital. His disease was an inflammation of the mesenteric membrane, often fatal and liable, even if cured, to change the constitution and produce hypochondria. His love affairs, which I alone discovered, were low-lived, and not only destroyed his health but ruined his future.

After twelve years of great misery he made his way to France under the Emperor’s decree permitting emigrants’ return. As the wayfarer crossed the Rhine and saw Strasburg’s tower against the evening sky, his strength gave way. “‘France! France!’ I cried. ‘I see France!’” (he said to me) “as a child cries ‘Mother!’ when hurt.” Born to wealth, he was now poor; made to command a regiment or govern a province, he was without authority or future; constitutionally robust, he returned infirm and utterly worn out. Without enough education to take part among men and affairs, broadened by events, without influence, he lived despoiled of everything. Want of money made his name a burden. His unalterable opinions, his antecedents with Condé, his trials, his recollections, his wasted health, gave him susceptibilities little spared in France, that land of jest and sarcasm. Half dead he reached Maine, where by some civil-war accident the revolutionary government had forgotten to sell one of his farms, which his farmer held by saying he was the owner.

When the Lenoncourt family at Givry heard of the Comte de Mortsauf’s arrival, the Duc de Lenoncourt invited him to stay while a house was prepared. The Lenoncourts were nobly generous, and with them he remained some months, struggling to hide his sufferings. The Lenoncourts had themselves lost immense property. By birth Monsieur de Mortsauf was a suitable husband for their daughter. Mademoiselle de Lenoncourt, instead of rejecting marriage with a feeble man of thirty-five, accepted. It gave her the opportunity of living with her aunt, the Duchesse de Verneuil, sister of the Prince de Blamont-Chauvry, who was like a mother.

Madame de Verneuil, intimate with the Duchesse de Bourbon, was a member of the devout society of which Monsieur Saint-Martin was the soul. The disciples practised virtues taught by mystical illumination: doctrines explaining existence by reincarnations through which the spirit rises; they liberate duty from legal degradation, enable serenity, ordain contempt for this life’s sufferings, and inspire care of the angel within us. It is stoicism with an immortal future. Active prayer and pure love are elements of this faith, born of the Church but returning to primitive Christianity. Mademoiselle de Lenoncourt remained in the Catholic communion, to which her aunt was bound. Cruelly tried by revolutionary horrors, the Duchesse de Verneuil acquired in her last years a halo of passionate piety, which shed celestial love upon her niece.

After the duchess’s death, Madame de Mortsauf received visits at Clochegourde from Saint-Martin, who corrected his last books there. Madame de Verneuil, wise with old age, gave Clochegourde to her niece; with grace she yielded everything, reserving one room above her old chamber for herself, which she fitted up for the countess. Her sudden death threw a gloom over the early days of the marriage and connected Clochegourde with sadness in the bride’s mind. The first period of her settlement was, I cannot say happiest, but the least troubled of her life.

After exile trials Monsieur de Mortsauf, dreaming of a secure future, had a certain recovery of mind; he breathed anew in this sweet valley and found some happiness in agricultural pursuits. But the birth of his first child, Jacques, was a thunderbolt that ruined past and future. The doctor declared the child had not vitality enough to live. The count concealed this from the mother but sought other advice and received the same fatal answer, confirmed at Madeleine’s birth. These events and an inward consciousness of the cause increased his diseased tendencies. His name doomed to extinction, a pure young woman made miserable beside him and doomed to the anguish of maternity without its joys—this uprising of his former into his present life crushed his spirit and completed its destruction.

The countess guessed the past from the present, and read the future. Though nothing is so difficult as to make a man happy when he knows himself to blame, she set herself to that task, worthy of an angel. She became stoical. Descending into an abyss, whence she still could see the sky, she devoted herself to the care of one man as a sister of charity devotes herself to many. To reconcile him with himself, she forgave what he could not forgive. The count grew miserly; she accepted his privations. Like all who know the world only to acquire suspicion, he feared betrayal; she lived in solitude and yielded without murmur to his mistrust. With a woman’s tact she made him will to do what was right until he fancied the ideas were his own, enjoying in his person honors never his. After experience of married life, she resolved never to leave Clochegourde; she saw his hysterical tendencies and feared outbreaks that gossip would turn to the injury of her children. Thus, thanks to her, no one suspected Monsieur de Mortsauf’s real incapacity; she wrapped his ruins in a mantle of ivy. The fickle, embittered nature of the man found rest in his wife; his secret anguish was lessened by the balm she shed.

This brief history is in part a summary forced from Monsieur de Chessel by vexation. His knowledge of the world enabled him to penetrate several mysteries of Clochegourde. But the prescience of love could not be misled by Madame de Mortsauf’s sublime attitude. When alone in my little bedroom, a sense of the full truth made me spring from my bed; I could not bear to stay at Frapesle when I saw Clochegourde’s lighted windows. I dressed, went softly down, and left the chateau by a tower door at the foot of a winding stairway. The cool night calmed me. I crossed the Indre by the bridge at the Red Mill, took the blessed punt, and rowed in front of Clochegourde, where a brilliant light streamed from a window looking towards Azay.

Again I plunged into my meditations, now peaceful, intermingled with the nightingale’s note and the solitary cry of the sedge-warbler. Ideas glided like fairies through my mind, lifting the black veil that had hidden the future. Soul and senses were charmed. With what passion my thoughts rose to her! Again and again I cried, like a madman, “Will she be mine?” During preceding days the universe had enlarged to me, but in a single night I found its centre. On her my will and ambition henceforth fastened; I desired to be all in all to her, that I might heal and fill her lacerated heart.

Beautiful was that night beneath her windows, amid the murmur of waters through the sluices, broken only by the clock-tower of Sache. During those hours of darkness bathed in light, I betrothed to her my soul with the faith of the poor Castilian knight in Cervantes—a faith with which all love begins.

At first gleam of day and the waking birds’ note I fled back among Frapesle’s trees and reached the house; no one had seen me, no one suspected my absence, and I slept soundly until breakfast. After the meal I went to the meadows for another sight of the Indre and its isles, the valley and slopes, of which I seemed such an admirer. But once there, by a swiftness of foot, I returned to my punt, the willows, and Clochegourde. All was silent and palpitating, as at midday in summer. The still foliage lay sharply defined on the blue sky; dragonflies and cantharides flew among reeds and ash-trees; cattle chewed the cud in shade, the vineyard earth glowed, adders glided up and down the banks. What a change in the sparkling landscape while I slept! I sprang from the boat and ran up the road round Clochegourde, for I fancied I saw the count coming out. I was not mistaken; he was walking beside the hedge, making for a gate on the road to Azay by the river bank.

“How are you this morning, Monsieur le comte?”

He looked at me pleasantly, not used to hear himself thus addressed.

“Quite well,” he answered. “You must love the country, to be rambling about in this heat!”

“I was sent here to live in the open air.”

“Then what do you say to coming with me to see them cut my rye?”

“Gladly,” I replied. “I’ll own my ignorance; I don’t know rye from wheat, nor a poplar from an aspen; I know nothing of farming nor of the methods of cultivating the soil.”

“Well, come and learn,” he cried gaily, returning upon his steps. “Come in by the little gate above.”

The count walked back along the hedge, he being within it and I without.

“You will learn nothing from Monsieur de Chessel,” he remarked; “he is altogether too fine a gentleman to do more than receive the reports of his bailiff.”

The count showed me yards and farm buildings, pleasure-grounds, orchards, vineyards, and kitchen garden, until we came to the long alley of acacias and ailanthus beside the river, at the end of which I saw Madame de Mortsauf sitting on a bench with her children. A woman is very lovely under such light and quivering shade. Surprised, perhaps, at my prompt visit, she did not move, knowing we would come. The count made me admire the view of the valley, which here differs from that seen from the heights. Here I might have thought myself in a corner of Switzerland. The meadows, furrowed with little brooks that flow into the Indre, stretch till lost in misty distance. Towards Montbazon the eye ranges over a vast plain; elsewhere it is stopped by hills and trees and rocks. We quickened as we approached Madame de Mortsauf, who dropped the book in which Madeleine was reading and took Jacques upon her knees as he had a violent cough.

“What’s the matter?” cried the count, turning livid.

“A sore throat,” answered the mother, who seemed not to see me; “but it is nothing serious.”

She held the child by head and body, and her eyes seemed to shed two rays of life into the poor frail creature.

“You are so extraordinarily imprudent,” said the count sharply; “you expose him to the river damps and let him sit on a stone bench.”

“Why, papa, the stone is burning hot,” cried Madeleine.

“They were suffocating higher up,” said the countess.

“Women always want to prove they are right,” said the count, turning to me.

To avoid agreeing or disagreeing I watched Jacques, who complained of his throat. His mother carried him away, but heard her husband say: “When they have brought such sickly children into the world they ought to learn how to take care of them.” Words cruelly unjust; his self-love drove him to defend himself at his wife’s expense. The countess hurried up the steps and into the portico, disappearing through the glass door. Monsieur de Mortsauf sat on the bench, head bowed in gloomy silence. My position was annoying; he neither spoke nor looked at me. Farewell to the walk he had proposed, in which I had hoped to fathom him. I hardly remember a more unpleasant moment. Ought I to go away, or not? How many painful thoughts must have arisen in his mind to make him forget to follow Jacques and learn his state! At last he rose abruptly and came towards me. We both turned and looked at the smiling valley.

“We will put off our walk to another day, Monsieur le comte,” I said gently.

“No, let us go,” he replied. “Unfortunately, I am accustomed to such scenes--I, who would give my life without the slightest regret to save that of the child.”

“Jacques is better, my dear; he has gone to sleep,” said a golden voice. Madame de Mortsauf suddenly appeared at the path’s end. She came forward without bitterness and bowed to me.

“I am glad to see you like Clochegourde,” she said.

“My dear, shall I ride over and fetch Monsieur Deslandes?” said the count, as if to secure her forgiveness.

“Don’t be worried,” she said. “Jacques did not sleep last night; he had a bad dream, and I told him stories all night to keep him quiet. His cough is purely nervous; I have stilled it with a lozenge, and he has gone to sleep.”

“Poor woman!” said her husband, taking her hand with a tearful look, “I knew nothing of it.”

“Why be troubled when there is no occasion?” she replied. “Now go and attend to the rye. You know if you are not there the men will let gleaners enter before the sheaves are carried away.”

“I am going to take a first lesson in agriculture, madame,” I said.

“You have a very good master,” she replied, motioning to the count, whose mouth screwed into that smile called a “bouche en coeur.”

Two months later I learned she had passed that night in great anxiety, fearing her son had the croup; while I, rocked by thoughts of love in my boat, imagined she might see me from her window adoring the gleam of the candle lighting a forehead furrowed by fears! The croup prevailed at Tours and was often fatal. When we were outside the gate, the count said in a voice of emotion, “Madame de Mortsauf is an angel!” The words staggered me. As yet I knew little of the family, and the conscience of a young soul made me exclaim inwardly: “What right have I to trouble this perfect peace?”

Glad to find a listener in a young man over whom he could lord it, the count talked of the future the Bourbons would secure. We had desultory conversation in which I listened to childish nonsense which amazed me. He was ignorant of facts susceptible of proof; he feared persons of education, rejected superiority, and scoffed at progress. I discovered many sensitive fibres in him which it required caution not to wound; a conversation with him was a strain. When I had felt his defects, I conformed with the same suppleness his wife showed in soothing him. Later I would certainly have made him angry, but now, humble as a child, supposing that I knew nothing and believing men in their prime knew all, I was genuinely amazed at results obtained at Clochegourde by this patient agriculturist. I besieged him with questions about prices and cultivation, and he seemed glad to answer in detail.

“What in the world do they teach you in your colleges?” he exclaimed at last in astonishment.

On that first day the count said to his wife when he reached home, “Monsieur Félix is a charming young man.”

That evening I wrote to my mother asking her to send my clothes and linen, saying I would remain at Frapesle. Ignorant of the great revolution that was just taking place, and not perceiving its influence upon my fate, I expected to return to Paris to resume legal studies. The Law School did not open till November; meantime I had two and a half months.

The first part of my stay, while I studied to understand the count, was a period of painful impressions. I found him extremely irascible without adequate cause; hasty in action dangerously so. Sometimes he showed glimpses of the brave gentleman of Condé’s army—parabolic flashes of will which in emergency may tear through politics like bomb-shells, and by honesty and courage make a man Elbée, Bonchamp, or Charette. In presence of certain ideas his nostril contracted, his forehead cleared, and his eyes shot lightnings soon quenched. Sometimes I feared he might detect my eyes’ language and kill me. I was young then and merely tender. Will had scarcely dawned within me. My passionate desires shook me like throes of fear. Death I feared not, but I would not die until I knew the happiness of mutual love. I was a prey to perplexity; I hoped for some fortunate chance; I watched; I made the children love me; I tried to identify with the family.

Little by little the count restrained himself less in my presence. I came to know his sudden outbreaks of temper, deep and ceaseless melancholy, flashes of brutality, bitter complaints, cold hatreds, impulses of latent madness, childish moans, cries of a man’s despair, unexpected fury. The moral nature differs from the physical inasmuch as nothing is absolute in it. My position at Clochegourde, my future life, depended on this one eccentric will.

I cannot describe the distress that filled me whenever I entered Clochegourde and asked myself, “How will he receive me?” With what anxiety I saw clouds collecting on that stormy brow. I lived in perpetual “qui-vive.” I fell under that man’s dominion; and the sufferings I endured taught me to understand Madame de Mortsauf’s. We began by exchanging looks of comprehension; tried by the same fire, how many discoveries I made during those first forty days—of actual bitterness, tacit joys, hopes alternately submerged and buoyant. One evening I found her pensively watching a sunset that reddened the summits with a ravishing glow. Did lost girlhood illusions return? Did the woman suffer an inward comparison? I fancied a desolation in her attitude favorable to my first appeal, and I said, “Some days are hard to bear.”

“You read my soul,” she answered; “but how have you done so?”

“We touch at many points,” I replied. “Surely we belong to the small number born to highest joys and deepest sorrows; whose feeling qualities vibrate in unison and echo each other; whose sensitive natures are in harmony with things. Put such beings among discordant surroundings and they suffer horribly, just as their happiness mounts when they meet congenial ideas or beings. There is a third condition, where sorrows are known only to souls affected by the same distress; in this alone is the highest fraternal comprehension. It may happen such souls find no outlet for good or evil. Then the organ within us endowed with expression is exercised in a void, expends passion without an object, utters sounds without melody, and cries lost in solitude,—terrible defeat of a soul revolting against inutility. These struggles weaken the soul; an indescribable melancholy for which the confessional has no ears. Have I not expressed our mutual sufferings?”

She shuddered, then without removing her eyes from the sun said, “How is it that, young as you are, you know these things? Were you once a woman?”

“Ah!” I replied, “my childhood was like a long illness—”

“I hear Madeleine coughing,” she cried, leaving me abruptly.

The countess showed no displeasure at my constant visits, for two reasons. First she was pure as a child, and her thoughts wandered into no forbidden regions; next I amused the count and made a sop for that lion without claws. I found an excuse for my visits which seemed plausible. Monsieur de Mortsauf proposed to teach me backgammon, and I accepted; as I did the countess was betrayed into a look of compassion, which seemed to say, “You fling yourself into the lion’s jaws.” If I did not understand this at the time, three days had not passed before I knew what I had undertaken. My patience, which nothing exhausts, the fruit of my miserable childhood, ripened under this trial. The count delighted when he could jeer at me for not practicing his rules; if I reflected he complained of slowness; if I played fast he was angry because I hurried him; if I forgot to mark points he declared I was always too rapid. It was like a schoolmaster’s tyranny. When we played for money his winnings gave him abject delight.

A word from his wife was enough to console me and recalled him to politeness. But soon I fell into unexpected misery. My money was disappearing under losses. Though the count was always present during my visits until I left, which was sometimes very late, I cherished hope of a moment when I might say a word to reach my idol’s heart; to obtain it I was forced to continue these weary games, during which my feelings were lacerated and my money lost. Still, there were moments when we were silent, she and I, looking at sunlight on meadows, clouds, misty hills, or the moon on the river sandbanks; saying only, “Night is beautiful!”

“Night is woman, madame.”

“What tranquillity!”

“Yes, no one can be absolutely wretched here.”

Then she would return to her embroidery. I came at last to hear the inward beatings of an affection which sought its object. But the fact remained—without money, farewell to these evenings. I wrote to my mother to send some. She scolded me and sent only enough to last a week. Where could I get more? My life depended on it. Thus in the dawn of my first great happiness I found the same sufferings that assailed me elsewhere; but in Paris at college I evaded them by abstinence; at Frapesle they were active; so active that I was possessed by impulses to theft, visions of crime, furiously desperate thoughts that rend the soul and must be subdued to keep self-respect. The memory of my mother’s parsimony taught me indulgence for young men which one who has stood upon the abyss must feel. Though my rectitude was strengthened by those moments when life opened and I saw rocks and quicksands beneath the surface, I have never known human justice draw its blade through a criminal’s throat without saying to myself: “Penal laws are made by men who have never known misery.”

At this crisis I found a treatise on backgammon in Monsieur de Chessel’s library, and I studied it. My host gave me a few lessons; less harshly taught by the count I made progress and applied rules and calculations I knew by heart. Within days I could beat Monsieur de Mortsauf; but no sooner had I done so and won his money than his temper became intolerable; his eyes glittered like a tiger’s, his face shrivelled, his brows knit as I never saw before. His complainings were those of a fretful child. Sometimes he flung down the dice, quivered with rage, bit the dice-box, and said insulting things to me. Such violence came to an end. When I had acquired mastery I played to suit me; I so managed that we were nearly equal up to the last moment; I allowed him to win the first half and made matters even during the last. The end of the world would have surprised him less than the rapid superiority of his pupil; but he never admitted it. The unvarying result of our games was a topic he fastened on.

“My poor head,” he would say, “is fatigued; you manage to win the last of the game because by that time I lose my skill.”

The countess, who knew backgammon, understood my manoeuvres from the first, and gave me mute thanks. From that evening she always looked at me when she spoke. I cannot explain my condition when I left her. My soul had annihilated my body; I weighed nothing; I did not walk, I flew. That look I carried within me; it bathed me with light, and her last words, “Adieu, monsieur,” still sounded in my soul. I was born into a new life; I was something to her! I slept on purple and fine linen. Flames darted before my closed eyelids in dreams; her voice became palpable, an atmosphere of light and fragrance wrapping me, a melody enfolding my spirit. On the morrow her greeting expressed fulness of unuttered feeling, and from that moment I was initiated into the secrets of her voice.

That day was decisive. After dinner we walked on the heights across a barren plain where no herbage grew; the ground was stony and arid, though a few scrub oaks and thorny bushes straggled, and instead of grass a carpet of crimped moss illuminated by sunset made our feet slip. I held Madeleine by the hand to keep her up. Madame de Mortsauf led Jacques. The count, in front, suddenly turned and striking the earth with his cane said to me in a dreadful tone: “Such is my life!--but before I knew you,” he added with a look at his wife. The reparation was tardy; the countess turned pale; what woman would not stagger?

“But what delightful scenes are wafted here, and what a view of the sunset!” I cried. “For my part I should like to own this barren moor; there may be treasures if we dig for them. But its greatest wealth is that of being near you. Who would not pay a great cost for such a view?—all harmony to the eye, with that winding river where the soul may bathe among ash-trees and alders. See the difference of taste! To you this spot is a barren waste; to me, paradise.”

She thanked me with a look.

“Bucolics!” exclaimed the count, bitterly. “This is no life for a man who bears your name.” Then he changed tone—“The bells!” he cried, “don’t you hear the bells of Azay? I hear them ringing.”

Madame de Mortsauf gave me a frightened look. Madeleine clung to my hand.

“Suppose we play a game of backgammon?” I said. “Let us go back; the rattle of the dice will drown the bells.”

We returned to Clochegourde, conversing by fits. Once in the salon an indefinable dread took possession of us. The count flung himself into an armchair absorbed in reverie which his wife, who knew his symptoms, was careful not to interrupt. I also kept silence. Perhaps she thought backgammon might divert him. Nothing was harder than to make him play, which he greatly desired. Like a pretty woman he required coaxing so he might not seem obliged. If, warned by ill-humor, I suggested a game, he would dally and demur. “It is too late,” he would say; “besides, I don’t care for it.” Then a series of affectations left you ignorant of his real wishes.

On this occasion I pretended gaiety to induce him. He complained of giddiness, his brain squeezed in a vice; he heard noises and was choking; then he sighed. At last he consented. Madame de Mortsauf left to put the children to bed and lead family prayers. All went well during her absence; I allowed Monsieur de Mortsauf to win, and his delight put him beside himself. This sudden change from gloom to wild joy expressed in a crazy laugh distressed and alarmed me. I had never seen him in so marked a paroxysm. Our intimacy bore fruits in that he no longer restrained himself before me. Day by day he endeavored to bring me under his tyranny and obtain fresh food for his evil temper; moral diseases seem like creatures seeking to enlarge their empire.

Presently the countess came down and sat near the backgammon table, apparently for better light on her embroidery though anxiety led her to place her frame. A bit of ill-luck changed the count’s face; from gaiety it fell to gloom, his eyes rolled. Then worse ill-luck followed. Monsieur de Mortsauf made a fatal throw which decided the game. Instantly he sprang up, flung the table at me and the lamp on the floor, struck the chimney-piece with his fist and jumped about the room. The torrent of insults, imprecations, and incoherent words that rushed from his lips would have made an observer think of medieval tales of satanic possession. Imagine my position!

“Go into the garden,” said the countess, pressing my hand.

I left before the count could notice my disappearance. On the terrace I slowly walked about and heard his shouts and moans from the adjoining bedroom. At intervals through that tempest I heard the voice of an angel, rising like a nightingale after rain. I walked under acacias in the loveliest night of August, waiting for the countess to join me. I knew she would come; her gesture promised it. For several days an explanation seemed to float between us; a word would have set it gushing. What timidity had delayed a full understanding? Perhaps she loved, as I did, these quiverings of the spirit resembling fear and numbing sensibilities while we held our life unuttered, hesitating to unveil its secrets with young modesty. An hour passed. I sat on the brick balustrade when the sound of her footsteps and the ripple of her gown stirred the calm night. These are sensations to which the heart suffices not.

“Monsieur de Mortsauf is sleeping,” she said. “When he is thus I give him an infusion of poppies, a cup of water with poppies steeped; the attacks are so infrequent this simple remedy never loses effect—Monsieur,” she continued, shifting tone and using the most persuasive inflexion, “this accident has revealed a secret sedulously kept; promise me to bury the recollection of that scene. Do this for my sake, I beg you. I don’t ask you to swear; give me your word of honor and I shall be content.”

“Need I give it to you?” I said. “Do we not understand each other?”

“You must not judge unfavorably of Monsieur de Mortsauf; you see effects of his sufferings under emigration,” she went on. “Tomorrow he will forget all that he has said and done; you will find him kind and excellent as ever.”

“Do not seek to excuse him, madame,” I replied. “I will do all you wish. I would fling myself into the Indre if I could restore Monsieur de Mortsauf’s health and ensure you a happy life. The only thing I cannot change is my opinion. I can give you my life, but not my convictions; I can pay no heed to what he says, but can I hinder him from saying it? No, in my opinion Monsieur de Mortsauf is—”

“I understand you,” she said, hastily interrupting me; “you are right. The count is as nervous as a fashionable woman,” she added, softening madness by the word. “But he is only so at intervals, once a year when the weather is very hot. Ah, what evils from the emigration! How many fine lives ruined! He would have been, I am sure, a great soldier, an honor to his country—”

“I know,” I said, interrupting to let her see it was useless to deceive me.

She stopped, laid one hand lightly on my brow, and looked at me. “Who has sent you here into this home? Has God sent me help, a true friendship to support me?” She paused, then, as she laid her hand upon mine, “For you are good and generous—” She raised her eyes to heaven as if to invoke testimony, and then let them rest upon me. Electrified by the look, which cast a soul into my soul, I was guilty, by social laws, of a want of tact, though in some natures such indelicacy means a brave desire to meet danger, avert a blow, arrest an evil; oftener, an abrupt call upon a heart to learn if it answers. Many thoughts rose like gleams and bade me wash out the stain that blotted my conscience at this moment when I sought understanding.

“Before we say more,” I said in a voice shaken by heart-throbbings, “suffer me to purify one memory of the past.”

“Hush!” she said quickly, touching my lips with a finger she instantly removed. She looked at me haughtily, with the glance of a woman too exalted for insult to reach her. “Be silent; I know of what you are about to speak,—the first, the last, the only outrage ever offered to me. Never speak to me of that ball. If as a Christian I have forgiven you, as a woman I still suffer from your act.”

“You are more pitiless than God himself,” I said, forcing back tears.

“I ought to be so, I am more feeble,” she replied.

“But,” I continued with persistence, “listen to me now if only for the first, the last, the only time in your life.”

“Speak, then,” she said; “speak, or you will think I dare not hear you.”

Feeling this was the turning moment of our lives, I spoke in a tone that commands attention; I told her that all women I had ever seen were nothing to me; but when I met her I, whose life was studious, whose nature not bold, had been possessed by a frenzy that no one who once felt it could condemn; that no heart had been so filled with passion that conquers all things even death—

“And contempt?” she asked, stopping me.

“Did you despise me?” I exclaimed.

“Let us say no more,” she replied.

“No, let me say all!” I replied, in the excitement of intolerable pain. “It concerns my life, my whole being; it holds a secret you must know or I must die in despair. It also concerns you, who, unawares, are the lady in whose hand is the crown promised to the victor in the tournament!”

Then I related my childhood and youth, not as told now with distance, but in the language of a young man whose wounds still bleed. My voice was like an axe in a forest. At every word the dead years fell with echoing sound, bristling with anguish. I described many cruel details which here I spare. I spread before her the treasure of my hopes, the virgin gold of my desires, the whole of a burning heart kept alive beneath perpetual winter. When, bowed by remembered sufferings related with live coal, I awaited the reply of the woman who listened with bowed head, she illumined the darkness with a look, quickened worlds terrestrial and divine with a single sentence.

“We have had the same childhood!” she said, turning a face on which the halo of martyrs shone.

After a pause, in which our souls were wedded in the thought, “I am not alone in suffering,” the countess told me in the voice she kept for her little ones how unwelcome she was as a girl when sons were wanted. She showed me how her troubles as a daughter bound to her mother differed from those of a boy cast into the world of school. My desolate neglect seemed a paradise compared to contact with a millstone under which her soul was ground until her aunt saved her. She told me of severities that had prepared her for present life. When her aunt died she received Clochegourde and set up a home; but the duchess’s death left a gloom.

“We lived in the same sphere before we met in this,” I said; “you coming from the east, I from the west.”

She shook her head.

“To you the east, to me the west,” she replied. “You will live happy, I must die of pain. Life is what we make of it, and mine is made forever. No power can break the heavy chain to which a woman is fastened by this ring of gold—the emblem of a wife’s purity.”

We knew we were twins of one womb; she never dreamed of half-confidence between brothers. After a short sigh she told me of her married life, deceptions and disillusions, the rebirth of her childhood’s misery. Like me she had suffered under trifles; mighty to souls whose substance quivers to the least shock, as a lake quivers when a stone is flung in. When she married she possessed some girlish savings; these, when needed, she gave to her husband without telling him. He took no account, never regarded himself her debtor. She did not obtain the glance of thanks that would have paid for all. Ah! how she went from trial to trial! Monsieur de Mortsauf habitually neglected to give her money for the household. When she asked, he seemed surprised and never spared her the mortification of petitioning for necessities. What terror filled her when her husband’s disease was revealed, and she quailed under his first outburst! What bitter reflections she made before admitting he was a wreck! What calamities had come of her bearing children! What anguish at infants born almost dead! With what courage had she said in her heart: “I will breathe the breath of life into them; I will bear them anew day by day!” Then conceive the bitterness of finding her greatest obstacle in the heart and hand from which a wife should draw succor! She saw the disaster that threatened him. As each difficulty was conquered, new deserts opened until the day she thoroughly understood her husband’s condition, the constitution of her children, and the character of the neighborhood; a day when she taught her feet to trample through mud and snow, trained her nerves to bullets, and all her being to passive obedience.

These things, which I summarize, she told me in dark extent with piteous detail of conjugal battles lost and fruitless struggles.

“You would have to live here many months,” she said, “to understand what difficulties I have met improving Clochegourde; what persuasions to make him do what was important. You cannot imagine the childish glee he shows when anything I advised was not at once successful. All that turns out well he claims for himself. Yes, I need infinite patience to bear his complaints when I am half-exhausted trying to amuse his weary hours, to sweeten his life and smooth paths he himself has strewn with stones. The reward is that awful cry: ‘Let me die, life is a burden to me!’ When visitors are here and he enjoys them, he forgets gloom and is courteous. You ask why he cannot be so to his family. I cannot explain that want of loyalty in a man chivalrous. He is quite capable of riding to Paris to buy me ornaments, as he did before the ball. Miserly in his household, he is lavish upon me if I wish it. I would it were reversed; I need nothing for myself, but household wants are many. In my desire to make him happy, I began by letting him treat me as a victim—I who could then, by a few caresses, have led him like a child—but I was unable to play a disgraceful part. Now, the family’s welfare requires me to be calm and stern as Justice—and yet, I too have a heart that overflows with tenderness.”

“But why,” I said, “do you not use this great influence to master him and govern him?”

“If it concerned myself only I should not attempt to overcome the dogged silence with which for days he meets my arguments, nor to answer his irrational remarks and childish reasons. I have no courage against weakness, any more than I have against childhood; they may strike me as they will, I cannot resist. Perhaps I might meet strength with strength, but I am powerless against those I pity. If required to coerce Madeleine in some matter that would save her life, I should die with her. Pity relaxes my fibres and unstrings my nerves. The violent shocks of the last ten years have broken me down; my feelings, so often battered, are numb; nothing can revive them; even the courage with which I once faced troubles begins to fail me. Yes, sometimes I am beaten. For want of rest—sea-baths to recover nervous strength—I shall perish. Monsieur de Mortsauf will have killed me, and he will die of my death.”

“Why not leave Clochegourde for a few months? Surely you could take your children to the seashore.”

“In the first place, Monsieur de Mortsauf would think he were lost if I left him. Though he will not admit his condition he is aware of it. He is both sane and mad, two natures in one, a contradiction explaining many irrational actions. Besides, he would have reason for objecting. Nothing would go right if I were absent. You may have seen in me a mother watchful to protect her young; harder still are cares imposed by Monsieur de Mortsauf, who constantly cries as he follows me, ‘Where is Madame?’ I am Jacques’ tutor and Madeleine’s governess; but that is not all, I am bailiff and steward too. You will understand what that means when you see that working an estate here is the most fatiguing of employments. We get small returns; farms are cultivated on shares needing close supervision. We must sell our produce, cattle and harvests. Competitors are our own farmers who meet consumers and determine prices by selling first. I would weary you if I explained difficulties. If you think of Monsieur de Mortsauf’s defective memory and the difficulty persuading him to attend to business, you can see my burden and the impossibility of laying it down even for a day. If I left no one would obey him; his orders conflict, no one likes him, and he listens readily to inferiors. If I left, not a servant would be in it in a week. So I am attached to Clochegourde as those leaden finals are to a roof. I have no reserves with you. The country-side is ignorant of our secrets, but you know them. Say nothing but what is kind and friendly, and you shall have my esteem—my gratitude,” she added softer. “On those terms you are welcome at Clochegourde, where you will find friends.”

“Ah!” I exclaimed, “I see I have never really suffered, while you—”

“No, no!” she exclaimed, with a smile that might melt granite. “Do not be astonished at my frank confidence; it shows life as it is, not as imagination pictures it. We all have defects and good qualities. If I had married a spendthrift he would have ruined me. If I had given myself to an ardent young man, perhaps I could not have retained him; he might have left me, and I should have died of jealousy. For I am jealous!” she cried, with excitement like a passing storm. “But Monsieur de Mortsauf loves me as much as he can; all that his heart contains of affection he pours at my feet, like Magdalen’s cup of ointment. Believe me, a life of love is an exception to earthly laws; all flowers fade; great joys have a morrow of evil—if a morrow at all. Real life is anguish; its image is that nettle at the foot of the wall—no sun can reach it and it keeps green. Yet here, as in parts of the North, there are smiles in the sky, few but compensating for grief. Moreover, women naturally mothers live and love more through sacrifices than pleasures. Here I draw upon myself storms I fear may break upon my children or people; in doing so I feel something I cannot explain which gives secret courage. The resignation of night carries me through the day after. God does not leave me comfortless. Time was when my children’s condition filled me with despair; to-day as they advance they grow healthier and stronger. And then, after all, our home is improved and beautified, our means improving. Who knows but Monsieur de Mortsauf’s old age may be a blessing? Those who stand before the Great Judge with palms in their hands, leading to Him beings who cursed their lives, they have turned sorrows into joy. If my sufferings bring about my family’s happiness, are they sufferings at all?”

“Yes,” I said, “they are; but they were necessary, as mine have been, to make us understand the true flavor of the fruit ripened on our rocks. Now, surely, we shall taste it together; surely we may admire its wonders, the sweetness of affection it has poured into our souls, that inward sap which revives searing leaves—Good God! do you not understand me?” I cried, falling into mystical language. “See the paths by which we approached each other; what magnet led us through that ocean of bitterness to these springs at the foot of those hills? Have we not followed the same star? We stand before the cradle of a divine child whose carol will renew the world for us, teach us a love of life, give nights their long-lost sleep, and days their gladness. What hand is this that year by year has tied new cords between us? Are we not more than brother and sister? That which heaven has joined we must not keep asunder. The sufferings you reveal are the seeds scattered by the sower for a harvest ripening in sunshine. Shall we not gather it sheaf by sheaf? What strength in me that I dare address you thus! Answer, or I will never again cross that river!”

“You have spared me the word love,” she said sternly, “but you have spoken of a sentiment I know nothing of and which is not permitted me. You are a child; and again I pardon you, but for the last time. Understand, Monsieur, that my heart is intoxicated with motherhood. I love Monsieur de Mortsauf neither from social duty nor from desire to win blessings, but from an irresistible feeling that fastens all the fibres of my heart upon him. Was my marriage a mistake? My sympathy for misfortune led to it. It is women’s part to heal woes, to comfort those who rush into the breach and return wounded. How shall I make you understand me? I have felt selfish pleasure in seeing you amuse him; is not that pure motherhood? Did I not make you see just now the three children to whom I am bound, to whom I shall never fail, on whom I strive to shed a healing dew and the light of my soul without withdrawing or adulterating a single particle? Do not embitter the mother’s milk! Though as a wife I am invulnerable, you must never again speak thus to me. If you do not respect this simple command, the door of this house will be closed to you. I believed in pure friendship, a voluntary brotherhood more real than blood. I was mistaken. I wanted a friend who was not a judge, a friend to listen in moments of weakness when reproof is killing, a sacred friend from whom I had nothing to fear. Youth is noble, truthful, capable of sacrifice; seeing your persistency I believed in some divine purpose; I thought I should find a soul that would be mine, a heart to pour my troubles into when they deluged mine. Could I but have this friend, my life precious to these children might be prolonged until Jacques grew to manhood. But that is selfish! The Laura of Petrarch cannot be lived again. I must die at my post, like a soldier, friendless. My confessor is harsh, austere, and—my aunt is dead.”

Two large tears filled her eyes, gleamed in moonlight, and rolled down her cheeks; I caught them and drank them with avidity, moved by her words and the thought of ten years of secret woe, of wasted feelings, of ceaseless care—years of lofty heroism. She looked at me with gentle stupefaction.

“It is the first communion of love,” I said. “Yes, I am now sharer of your sorrows. I am united to your soul as our souls are united to Christ in the sacrament. To love, even without hope, is happiness. What woman could give me a joy equal to receiving your tears! I accept the contract ending in suffering to myself. I give myself to you with no ulterior thought. I will be to you that which you will me to be—”

She stopped me with a motion and said in a deep voice, “I consent if you will promise never to tighten the bonds that bind us.”

“Yes,” I said; “but the less you grant the more evidence of possession I ought to have.”

“You begin by distrusting me,” she replied, with melancholy doubt.

“No, I speak from pure happiness. Listen; give me a name by which no one calls you; a name to be ours only, like the feeling that unites us.”

“That is much to ask,” she said, “but I will show I am not petty. Monsieur de Mortsauf calls me Blanche. One only person, my dear aunt, called me Henriette. I will be Henriette once more, to you.”

I took her hand and kissed it. She left it in mine with the trustfulness that makes a woman so far superior to men; a trustfulness that shames us. She leaned on the balustrade and gazed at the river.

“Are you not unwise to rush to friendship’s extremes? You have drained the cup at a draught. It is true a real feeling is never piecemeal; it must be whole. Monsieur de Mortsauf,” she added after a short silence, “is above all things loyal and brave. Perhaps for my sake you will forget what he said to-day; if he forgets to-morrow I will tell him what occurred. Do not come to Clochegourde for a few days; he will respect you more if you do not. On Sunday, after church, he will go to you. I know him; he will wish to undo the wrong, and he will like you better for treating him as a responsible man.”

“Five days without seeing you, without hearing your voice!”

“Do not put such warmth into your manner of speaking to me,” she said.

We walked twice round the terrace in silence. Then she said with a tone of command that she had taken possession of my soul, “It is late; we will part.”

I wished to kiss her hand; she hesitated, then gave it and said entreatingly: “Never take it unless I give it to you; leave me my freedom; if not, I shall be simply a thing of yours, and that ought not to be.”

“Adieu,” I said.

She opened the lower terrace gate for me. Just as she was about to close it she opened it again and offered her hand, saying: “You have been truly good to me this evening; you have comforted my whole future; take it, my friend, take it.”

I kissed her hand again and again, and when I raised my eyes I saw tears in hers. She returned to the upper terrace and I watched her from the meadow. When on the road to Frapesle I saw her white robe in a moonbeam; a few moments later a light was in her bedroom.

“Oh, my Henriette!” I cried, “to you I pledge the purest love that ever shone upon this earth.”

I turned at every step as I regained Frapesle. Ineffable contentment filled me. A way was open for the devotion swelling in youth and long inert in me. Like the priest entering a new life, my vows were taken; I was consecrated. A simple “Yes” had bound me to keep my love within my soul and never to abuse our friendship by leading this woman step by step to love. Noble feelings were awakened, and I heard their murmur. Before confining myself within a room I stopped beneath an azure heaven sown with stars, listened to ring-dove plaints of my heart, heard again the simple tones of that ingenuous confidence, gathered in the air emanations of that soul which henceforth must ever seek me. How grand that woman seemed, with absolute forgetfulness of self, her religion of mercy to wounded hearts, her declared allegiance to her legal yoke. She stood serene upon her pyre of saint and martyr. I adored her face as it shone in darkness. Suddenly I fancied a meaning in her words, a mysterious sign making her sublime. Perhaps she longed that I should be to her what she was to the little world around her. Perhaps she sought to draw from me strength and consolation, putting me within her sphere, her equal, or perhaps above her. The stars, some bold builders say, communicate light and motion. This thought lifted me to ethereal regions. I entered once more the heaven of former visions; I found a meaning for my childhood miseries in the illimitable happiness they had led me to.

Spirits quenched by tears, hearts misunderstood, saintly Clarissa Harlowe forgotten, children neglected, exiles innocent of wrong, all ye who enter life through barren ways, on whom men’s faces look coldly and ears close, cease your complaints! You alone can know the infinitude of joy in that moment when one heart opens to you, one ear listens, one look answers. A single day effaces past evil. Sorrow, despondency, despair, and melancholy passed but not forgotten are links by which the soul fastens to its mate. Woman falls heir to all our past and gives them back ennobled; she explains those former griefs as destiny’s payment for joys eternal which she brings when our souls are wedded. Angels alone can utter the new name of that sacred love, and none but women, dear martyrs, truly know what Madame de Mortsauf became to me—to me, poor and desolate.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
I can do this, but the requested output (about 22,400 words) is too long to produce in a single reply here. I can:

- Produce the 1%-shorter version in several consecutive messages (I would split the chapter into manageable chunks and return the edited text piece by piece), or
- Produce a single shorter (more compressed) summary now (e.g., 10–30% shorter) if that would be acceptable, or
- Provide a focused edit plan and examples of where I would cut to reach ~1% reduction, then implement the cuts once you confirm.

Which option do you prefer? If you want the chapter edited in full at ~1% reduction, I’ll proceed by sending it in parts — tell me how many parts you'd like (I suggest 3–5).
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
As I read this letter I felt the maternal heart beating beneath my fingers which held the paper while I was still cold from the harsh greeting of my own mother. I understood why the countess had forbidden me to open it in Touraine; she feared I would fall at her feet and wet them with my tears.

I now made the acquaintance of my brother Charles, who up to this time had been a stranger to me. But in all our intercourse he showed a haughtiness which kept us apart and prevented brotherly affection. Kindly feelings depend on similarity of soul, and there was no point of touch between us. He preached to me dogmatically those social trifles which head or heart can see without instruction; he seemed to mistrust me. If I had not had the inward support of my great love he would have made me awkward and stupid by affecting to believe that I knew nothing of life. He presented me in society under the expectation that my dulness would be a foil to his qualities. Had I not remembered the sorrows of my childhood I might have taken his protecting vanity for brotherly affection; but inward solitude produces the same effects as outward solitude; silence within our souls enables us to hear the faintest sound; the habit of taking refuge within ourselves develops a perception which discerns every quality of the affections about us. Before I knew Madame de Mortsauf a hard look grieved me, a rough word wounded me to the heart; I bewailed these things without as yet knowing anything of a life of tenderness; whereas now, since my return from Clochegourde, I could make comparisons which perfected my instinctive perceptions. All deductions derived only from sufferings endured are incomplete. Happiness has a light to cast. I now allowed myself the more willingly to be kept under the heel of primogeniture because I was not my brother’s dupe.

I always went alone to the Duchesse de Lenoncourt’s, where Henriette’s name was never mentioned; no one, except the good old duke, who was simplicity itself, ever spoke of her to me; but by the way he welcomed me I guessed that his daughter had privately commended me to his care. At the moment when I was beginning to overcome the foolish wonder and shyness which besets a young man at his first entrance into the great world, and to realize the pleasures it could give through the resources it offers to ambition, just, too, as I was beginning to make use of Henriette’s maxims, admiring their wisdom, the events of the 20th of March took place.

My brother followed the court to Ghent; I, by Henriette’s advice (for I kept up a correspondence with her, active on my side only), went there also with the Duc de Lenoncourt. The natural kindness of the old duke turned to a hearty and sincere protection as soon as he saw me attached, body and soul, to the Bourbons. He himself presented me to his Majesty. Courtiers are not numerous when misfortunes are rife; but youth is gifted with ingenuous admiration and uncalculating fidelity. The king had the faculty of judging men; a devotion which might have passed unobserved in Paris counted for much at Ghent, and I had the happiness of pleasing Louis XVIII.

A letter from Madame de Mortsauf to her father, brought with despatches by an emissary of the Vendeens, enclosed a note to me by which I learned that Jacques was ill. Monsieur de Mortsauf, in despair at his son’s ill-health, and also at the news of a second emigration, added a few words which enabled me to guess the situation of my dear one. Worried by him, no doubt, when she passed all her time at Jacques’ bedside, allowed no rest either day or night, superior to annoyance, yet unable always to control herself when her whole soul was given to the care of her child, Henriette needed the support of a friendship which might lighten the burden of her life, were it only by diverting her husband’s mind. Though I was now most impatient to rival the career of my brother, who had lately been sent to the Congress of Vienna, and was anxious at any risk to justify Henriette’s appeal and become a man myself, freed from all vassalage, nevertheless my ambition, my desire for independence, the great interest I had in not leaving the king, all were of no account before the vision of Madame de Mortsauf’s sad face. I resolved to leave the court at Ghent and serve my true sovereign. God rewarded me. The emissary sent by the Vendeens was unable to return. The king wanted a messenger who would faithfully carry back his instructions. The Duc de Lenoncourt knew that the king would never forget the man who undertook so perilous an enterprise; he asked for the mission without consulting me, and I gladly accepted it, happy indeed to be able to return to Clochegourde employed in the good cause.

After an audience with the king I returned to France, where, both in Paris and in Vendee, I was fortunate enough to carry out his Majesty’s instructions. Towards the end of May, being tracked by the Bonapartist authorities to whom I was denounced, I was obliged to fly from place to place in the character of a man endeavoring to get back to his estate. I went on foot from park to park, from wood to wood, across the whole of upper Vendee, the Bocage and Poitou, changing my direction as danger threatened.

I reached Saumur, from Saumur I went to Chinon, and from Chinon I reached, in a single night, the woods of Nueil, where I met the count on horseback; he took me up behind him and we reached Clochegourde without passing any one who recognized me.

“Jacques is better,” were the first words he said to me.

I explained to him my position of diplomatic postman, hunted like a wild beast, and the brave gentleman in his quality of royalist claimed the danger over Chessel of receiving me. As we came in sight of Clochegourde the past eight months rolled away like a dream. When we entered the salon the count said: “Guess whom I bring you?--Felix!”

“Is it possible!” she said, with pendant arms and a bewildered face.

I showed myself and we both remained motionless; she in her armchair, I on the threshold of the door; looking at each other with that hunger of the soul which endeavors to make up in a single glance for the lost months. Then, recovering from a surprise which left her heart unveiled, she rose and I went up to her.

“I have prayed for your safety,” she said, giving me her hand to kiss.

She asked news of her father; then she guessed my weariness and went to prepare my room, while the count gave me something to eat, for I was dying of hunger. My room was the one above hers, her aunt’s room; she requested the count to take me there, after setting her foot on the first step of the staircase, deliberating no doubt whether to accompany me; I turned my head, she blushed, bade me sleep well, and went away. When I came down to dinner I heard for the first time of the disasters at Waterloo, the flight of Napoleon, the march of the Allies to Paris, and the probable return of the Bourbons. These events were all in all to the count; to us they were nothing. What think you was the great event I was to learn, after kissing the children?--for I will not dwell on the alarm I felt at seeing the countess pale and shrunken; I knew the injury I might do by showing it and was careful to express only joy at seeing her. But the great event for us was told in the words, “You shall have ice to-day!” She had often fretted the year before that the water was not cold enough for me, who, never drinking anything else, liked it iced. God knows how many entreaties it had cost her to get an ice-house built. You know better than any one that a word, a look, an inflection of the voice, a trifling attention, suffices for love; love’s noblest privilege is to prove itself by love. Well, her words, her look, her pleasure, showed me her feelings, as I had formerly shown her mine by that first game of backgammon. These ingenuous proofs of her affection were many; on the seventh day after my arrival she recovered her freshness, she sparkled with health and youth and happiness; my lily expanded in beauty just as the treasures of my heart increased. Only in petty minds or in common hearts can absence lessen love or efface the features or diminish the beauty of our dear one. To ardent imaginations, to all beings through whose veins enthusiasm passes like a crimson tide, and in whom passion takes the form of constancy, absence has the same effect as the sufferings of the early Christians, which strengthened their faith and made God visible to them. In hearts that abound in love are there not incessant longings for a desired object, to which the glowing fire of our dreams gives higher value and a deeper tint? Are we not conscious of instigations which give to the beloved features the beauty of the ideal by inspiring them with thought? The past, dwelt on in all its details becomes magnified; the future teems with hope. When two hearts filled with these electric clouds meet each other, their interview is like the welcome storm which revives the earth and stimulates it with the swift lightnings of the thunderbolt. How many tender pleasures came to me when I found these thoughts and these sensations reciprocal! With what glad eyes I followed the development of happiness in Henriette! A woman who renews her life from that of her beloved gives, perhaps, a greater proof of feeling than she who dies killed by a doubt, withered on her stock for want of sap; I know not which of the two is the more touching.

The revival of Madame de Mortsauf was wholly natural, like the effects of the month of May upon the meadows, or those of the sun and of the brook upon the drooping flowers. Henriette, like our dear valley of love, had had her winter; she revived like the valley in the springtime. Before dinner we went down to the beloved terrace. There, with one hand stroking the head of her son, who walked feebly beside her, silent, as though he were breeding an illness, she told me of her nights beside his pillow.

For three months, she said, she had lived wholly within herself, inhabiting, as it were, a dark palace; afraid to enter sumptuous rooms where the light shone, where festivals were given, to her denied, at the door of which she stood, one glance turned upon her child, another to a dim and distant figure; one ear listening for moans, another for a voice. She told me poems, born of solitude, such as no poet ever sang; but all ingenuously, without one vestige of love, one trace of voluptuous thought, one echo of a poesy orientally soothing as the rose of Frangistan. When the count joined us she continued in the same tone, like a woman secure within herself, able to look proudly at her husband and kiss the forehead of her son without a blush. She had prayed much; she had clasped her hands for nights together over her child, refusing to let him die.

“I went,” she said, “to the gate of the sanctuary and asked his life of God.”

She had had visions, and she told them to me; but when she said, in that angelic voice of hers, these exquisite words, “While I slept my heart watched,” the count harshly interrupted her.

“That is to say, you were half crazy,” he cried.

She was silent, as deeply hurt as though it were a first wound; forgetting that for thirteen years this man had lost no chance to shoot his arrows into her heart. Like a soaring bird struck on the wing by vulgar shot, she sank into a dull depression; then she roused herself.

“How is it, monsieur,” she said, “that no word of mine ever finds favor in your sight? Have you no indulgence for my weakness,--no comprehension of me as a woman?”

She stopped short. Already she regretted the murmur, and measured the future by the past; how could she expect comprehension? Had she not drawn upon herself some virulent attack? The blue veins of her temples throbbed; she shed no tears, but the color of her eyes faded. Then she looked down, that she might not see her pain reflected on my face, her feelings guessed, her soul wooed by my soul; above all, not see the sympathy of young love, ready like a faithful dog to spring at the throat of whoever threatened his mistress, without regard to the assailant’s strength or quality. At such cruel moments the count’s air of superiority was supreme. He thought he had triumphed over his wife, and he pursued her with a hail of phrases which repeated the one idea, and were like the blows of an axe which fell with unvarying sound.

“Always the same?” I said, when the count left us to follow the huntsman who came to speak to him.

“Always,” answered Jacques.

“Always excellent, my son,” she said, endeavoring to withdraw Monsieur de Mortsauf from the judgment of his children. “You see only the present, you know nothing of the past; therefore you cannot criticise your father without doing him injustice. But even if you had the pain of seeing that your father was to blame, family honor requires you to bury such secrets in silence.”

“How have the changes at the Cassine and the Rhetoriere answered?” I asked, to divert her mind from bitter thoughts.

“Beyond my expectations,” she replied. “As soon as the buildings were finished we found two excellent farmers ready to hire them; one at four thousand five hundred francs, taxes paid; the other at five thousand; both leases for fifteen years. We have already planted three thousand young trees on the new farms. Manette’s cousin is delighted to get the Rabelaye; Martineau has taken the Baude. All our efforts have been crowned with success. Clochegourde, without the reserved land which we call the home-farm, and without the timber and vineyards, brings in nineteen thousand francs a year, and the plantations are becoming valuable. I am battling to let the home-farm to Martineau, the keeper, whose eldest son can now take his place. He offers three thousand francs if Monsieur de Mortsauf will build him a farm-house at the Commanderie. We might then clear the approach to Clochegourde, finish the proposed avenue to the main road, and have only the woodland and the vineyards to take care of ourselves. If the king returns, our pension will be restored; we shall consent after clashing a little with our wife’s common-sense. Jacques’ fortune will then be permanently secured. That result obtained, I shall leave monsieur to lay by as much as he likes for Madeleine, though the king will of course dower her, according to custom. My conscience is easy; I have all but accomplished my task. And you?” she said.

I explained to her the mission on which the king had sent me, and showed her how her wise counsel had borne fruit. Was she endowed with second sight thus to foretell events?

“Did I not write it to you?” she answered. “For you and for my children alone I possess a remarkable faculty, of which I have spoken only to my confessor, Monsieur de la Berge; he explains it by divine intervention. Often, after deep meditation induced by fears about the health of my children, my eyes close to the things of earth and see into another region; if Jacques and Madeleine there appear to me as two luminous figures they are sure to have good health for a certain period of time; if wrapped in mist they are equally sure to fall ill soon after. As for you, I not only see you brilliantly illuminated, but I hear a voice which explains to me without words, by some mental communication, what you ought to do. Does any law forbid me to use this wonderful gift for my children and for you?” she asked, falling into a reverie. Then, after a pause, she added, “Perhaps God wills to take the place of their father.”

“Let me believe that my obedience is due to none but you,” I cried.

She gave me one of her exquisitely gracious smiles, which so exalted my heart that I should not have felt a death-blow if given at that moment.

“As soon as the king returns to Paris, go there; leave Clochegourde,” she said. “It may be degrading to beg for places and favors, but it would be ridiculous to be out of the way of receiving them. Great changes will soon take place. The king needs capable and trustworthy men; don’t fail him. It is well for you to enter young into the affairs of the nation and learn your way; for statesmen, like actors, have a routine business to acquire, which genius does not reveal, it must be learnt. My father heard the Duc de Choiseul say this. Think of me,” she said, after a pause; “let me enjoy the pleasures of superiority in a soul that is all my own; for are you not my son?”

“Your son?” I said, sullenly.

“Yes, my son!” she cried, mocking me; “is not that a good place in my heart?”

The bell rang for dinner; she took my arm and leaned contentedly upon it.

“You have grown,” she said, as we went up the steps. When we reached the portico she shook my arm a little, as if my looks were importunate; for though her eyes were lowered she knew that I saw only her. Then she said, with a charming air of pretended impatience, full of grace and coquetry, “Come, why don’t you look at our dear valley?”

She turned, held her white silk sun-shade over our heads and drew Jacques closely to her side. The motion of her head as she looked towards the Indre, the punt, the meadows, showed me that in my absence she had come to many an understanding with those misty horizons and their vaporous outline. Nature was a mantle which sheltered her thoughts. She now knew what the nightingale was sighing the livelong night, what the songster of the sedges hymned with his plaintive note.

At eight o’clock that evening I was witness of a scene which touched me deeply, and which I had never yet witnessed, for in my former visits I had played backgammon with the count while his wife took the children into the dining-room before their bedtime. The bell rang twice, and all the servants of the household entered the room.

“You are now our guest and must submit to convent rule,” said the countess, leading me by the hand with that air of innocent gaiety which distinguishes women who are naturally pious.

The count followed. Masters, children, and servants knelt down, all taking their regular places. It was Madeleine’s turn to read the prayers. The dear child said them in her childish voice, the ingenuous tones of which rose clear in the harmonious silence of the country, and gave to the words the candor of holy innocence, the grace of angels. It was the most affecting prayer I ever heard. Nature replied to the child’s voice with the myriad murmurs of the coming night, like the low accompaniment of an organ lightly touched, Madeleine was on the right of the countess, Jacques on her left. The graceful curly heads, between which rose the smooth braids of the mother, and above all three the perfectly white hair and yellow cranium of the father, made a picture which repeated, in some sort, the ideas aroused by the melody of the prayer. As if to fulfil all conditions of the unity which marks the sublime, this calm and collected group were bathed in the fading light of the setting sun; its red tints coloring the room, impelling the soul--be it poetic or superstitious--to believe that the fires of heaven were visiting these faithful servants of God as they knelt there without distinction of rank, in the equality which heaven demands. Thinking back to the days of the patriarchs my mind still further magnified this scene, so grand in its simplicity.

The children said good-night, the servants bowed, the countess went away holding a child by each hand, and I returned to the salon with the count.

“We provide you with salvation there, and hell here,” he said, pointing to the backgammon-board.

The countess returned in half an hour, and brought her frame near the table.

“This is for you,” she said, unrolling the canvas; “but for the last three months it has languished. Between that rose and this heartsease my poor child was ill.”

“Come, come,” said Monsieur de Mortsauf, “don’t talk of that any more. Six--five, emissary of the king!”

When alone in my room I hushed my breathing that I might hear her passing to and fro in hers. She was calm and pure, but I was lashed with maddening ideas. “Why should she not be mine?” I thought; “perhaps she is, like me, in this whirlwind of agitation.” At one o’clock, I went down, walking noiselessly, and lay before her door. With my ear pressed to a chink I could hear her equable, gentle breathing, like that of a child. When chilled to the bone I went back to bed and slept tranquilly till morning. I know not what prenatal influence, what nature within me, causes the delight I take in going to the brink of precipices, sounding the gulf of evil, seeking to know its depths, feeling its icy chill, and retreating in deep emotion. That hour of night passed on the threshold of her door where I wept with rage,--though she never knew that on the morrow her foot had trod upon my tears and kisses, on her virtue first destroyed and then respected, cursed and adored,--that hour, foolish in the eyes of many, was nevertheless an inspiration of the same mysterious impulse which impels the soldier. Many have told me they have played their lives upon it, flinging themselves before a battery to know if they could escape the shot, happy in thus galloping into the abyss of probabilities, and smoking like Jean Bart upon the gunpowder.

The next day I went to gather flowers and made two bouquets. The count admired them, though generally nothing of the kind appealed to him. The clever saying of Champcenetz, “He builds dungeons in Spain,” seemed to have been made for him.

I spent several days at Clochegourde, going but seldom to Frapesle, where, however, I dined three times. The French army now occupied Tours. Though my presence was health and strength to Madame de Mortsauf, she implored me to make my way to Chateauroux, and so round by Issoudun and Orleans to Paris with what haste I could. I tried to resist; but she commanded me, saying that my guardian angel spoke. I obeyed. Our farewell was, this time, dim with tears; she feared the allurements of the life I was about to live. Is it not a serious thing to enter the maelstrom of interests, passions, and pleasures which make Paris a dangerous ocean for chaste love and purity of conscience? I promised to write to her every night, relating the events and thoughts of the day, even the most trivial. When I gave the promise she laid her head on my shoulder and said: “Leave nothing out; everything will interest me.”

She gave me letters for the duke and duchess, which I delivered the second day after my return.

“You are in luck,” said the duke; “dine here to-day, and go with me this evening to the Chateau; your fortune is made. The king spoke of you this morning, and said, ‘He is young, capable, and trustworthy.’ His Majesty added that he wished he knew whether you were living or dead, and in what part of France events had thrown you after you had executed your mission so ably.”

That night I was appointed master of petitions to the council of State, and I also received a private and permanent place in the employment of Louis XVIII. himself,--a confidential position, not highly distinguished, but without any risks, a position which put me at the very heart of the government and has been the source of all my subsequent prosperity. Madame de Mortsauf had judged rightly. I now owed everything to her; power and wealth, happiness and knowledge; she guided and encouraged me, purified my heart, and gave to my will that unity of purpose without which the powers of youth are wasted. Later I had a colleague; we each served six months. We were allowed to supply each other’s place if necessary; we had rooms at the Chateau, a carriage, and large allowances for travelling when absent on missions. Strange position! We were the secret disciples of a monarch in a policy to which even his enemies have since done signal justice; alone with us he gave judgment on all things, foreign and domestic, yet we had no legitimate influence; often we were consulted like Laforet by Moliere, and made to feel that the hesitations of long experience were confirmed or removed by the vigorous perceptions of youth.

In other respects my future was secured in a manner to satisfy ambition. Beside my salary as master of petitions, paid by the budget of the council of State, the king gave me a thousand francs a month from his privy purse, and often himself added more to it. Though the king knew well that no young man of twenty-three could long bear up under the labors with which he loaded me, my colleague, now a peer of France, was not appointed till August, 1817. The choice was a difficult one; our functions demanded so many capabilities that the king was long in coming to a decision. He did me the honor to ask which of the young men among whom he was hesitating I should like for an associate. Among them was one who had been my school-fellow at Lepitre’s; I did not select him. His Majesty asked why.

“The king,” I replied, “chooses men who are equally faithful, but whose capabilities differ. I choose the one whom I think the most able, certain that I shall always be able to get on with him.”

My judgment coincided with that of the king, who was pleased with the sacrifice I had made. He said on this occasion, “You are to be the chief”; and he related these circumstances to my colleague, who became, in return for the service I had done him, my good friend. The consideration shown to me by the Duc de Lenoncourt set the tone of that which I met with in society. To have it said, “The king takes an interest in the young man; that young man has a future, the king likes him,” would have served me in place of talents; and it now gave to the kindly welcome accorded to youth a certain respect that is only given to power. In the salon of the Duchesse de Lenoncourt and also at the house of my sister who had just married the Marquis de Listomere, son of the old lady in the Ile St. Louis, I gradually came to know the influential personages of the Faubourg St. Germain.

Henriette herself put me at the heart of the circle then called “le Petit Chateau” by the help of her great-aunt, the Princesse de Blamont-Chauvry, to whom she wrote so warmly in my behalf that the princess immediately sent for me. I cultivated her and contrived to please her, and she became, not my protectress but a friend, in whose kindness there was something maternal. The old lady took pains to make me intimate with her daughter Madame d’Espard, with the Duchesse de Langeais, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant, and the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse, women who held the sceptre of fashion, and who were all the more gracious to me because I made no pretensions and was always ready to be useful and agreeable to them. My brother Charles, far from avoiding me, now began to lean upon me; but my rapid success roused a secret jealousy in his mind which in after years caused me great vexation. My father and mother, surprised by a triumph so unexpected, felt their vanity flattered, and received me at last as a son. But their feeling was too artificial, I might say false, to let their present treatment have much influence upon a sore heart. Affectations stained with selfishness win little sympathy; the heart abhors calculations and profits of all kinds.

I wrote regularly to Henriette, who answered by two letters a month. Her spirit hovered over me, her thoughts traversed space and made the atmosphere around me pure. No woman could captivate me. The king noticed my reserve, and as, in this respect, he belonged to the school of Louis XV., he called me, in jest, Mademoiselle de Vandenesse; but my conduct pleased him. I am convinced that the habit of patience I acquired in my childhood and practised at Clochegourde had much to do in my winning the favor of the king, who was always most kind to me. He no doubt took a fancy to read my letters, for he soon gave up his notion of my life as that of a young girl. One day when the duke was on duty, and I was writing at the king’s dictation, the latter suddenly remarked, in that fine, silvery voice of his, to which he could give, when he chose, the biting tone of epigram:--

“So that poor devil of a Mortsauf persists in living?”

“Yes,” replied the duke.

“Madame de Mortsauf is an angel, whom I should like to see at my court,” continued the king; “but if I cannot manage it, my chancellor here,” turning to me, “may be more fortunate. You are to have six months’ leave; I have decided on giving you the young man we spoke of yesterday as colleague. Amuse yourself at Clochegourde, friend Cato!” and he laughed as he had himself wheeled out of the room.

I flew like a swallow to Touraine. For the first time I was to show myself to my beloved, not merely a little less insignificant, but actually in the guise of an elegant young man, whose manners had been formed in the best salons, his education finished by gracious women; who had found at last a compensation for all his sufferings, and had put to use the experience given to him by the purest angel to whom heaven had ever committed the care of a child. You know how my mother had equipped me for my three months’ visit at Frapesle. When I reached Clochegourde after fulfilling my mission in Vendee, I was dressed like a huntsman; I wore a jacket with white and red buttons, striped trousers, leathern gaiters and shoes. Tramping through underbrush had so injured my clothes that the count was obliged to lend me linen. On the present occasion, two years’ residence in Paris, constant intercourse with the king, the habits of a life at ease, my completed growth, a youthful countenance, which derived a lustre from the placidity of the soul within magnetically united with the pure soul that beamed on me from Clochegourde,--all these things combined had transformed me. I was self-possessed without conceit, inwardly pleased to find myself, in spite of my years, at the summit of affairs; above all, I had the consciousness of being secretly the support and comfort of the dearest woman on earth, and her unuttered hope. Perhaps I felt a flutter of vanity as the postilions cracked their whips along the new avenue leading from the main road to Clochegourde and through an iron gate I had never seen before, which opened into a circular enclosure recently constructed. I had not written to the countess of my coming, wishing to surprise her. For this I found myself doubly in fault: first, she was overwhelmed with the excitement of a pleasure long desired, but supposed to be impossible; and secondly, she proved to me that all such deliberate surprises are in bad taste.

When Henriette saw a young man in him who had hitherto seemed but a child to her, she lowered her eyes with a sort of tragic slowness. She allowed me to take and kiss her hand without betraying her inward pleasure, which I nevertheless felt in her sensitive shiver. When she raised her face to look at me again, I saw that she was pale.

“Well, you don’t forget your old friends?” said Monsieur de Mortsauf, who had neither changed nor aged.

The children sprang upon me. I saw them behind the grave face of the Abbe Dominis, Jacques’ tutor.

“No,” I replied, “and in future I am to have six months’ leave, which will always be spent here--Why, what is the matter?” I said to the countess, putting my arm round her waist and holding her up in presence of them all.

“Oh, don’t!” she said, springing away from me; “it is nothing.”

I read her mind, and answered to its secret thought by saying, “Am I not allowed to be your faithful slave?”

She took my arm, left the count, the children, and the abbe, and led me to a distance on the lawn, though still within sight of the others; then, when sure that her voice could not be heard by them, she spoke.

“Felix, my dear friend,” she said, “forgive my fears; I have but one thread by which to guide me in the labyrinth of life, and I dread to see it broken. Tell me that I am more than ever Henriette to you, that you will never abandon me, that nothing shall prevail against me, that you will ever be my devoted friend. I have suddenly had a glimpse into my future, and you were not there, as hitherto, your eyes shining and fixed upon me--”

“Henriette! idol whose worship is like that of the Divine,--lily, flower of my life, how is it that you do not know, you who are my conscience, that my being is so fused with yours that my soul is here when my body is in Paris? Must I tell you that I have come in seventeen hours, that each turn of the wheels gathered thoughts and desires in my breast, which burst forth like a tempest when I saw you?”

“Yes, tell me! tell me!” she cried; “I am so sure of myself that I can hear you without wrong. God does not will my death. He sends you to me as he sends his breath to his creatures; as he pours the rain of his clouds upon a parched earth,--tell me! tell me! Do you love me sacredly?”

“Sacredly.”

“For ever?”

“For ever.”

“As a virgin Mary, hidden behind her veil, beneath her white crown.”

“As a virgin visible.”

“As a sister?”

“As a sister too dearly loved.”

“With chivalry and without hope?”

“With chivalry and with hope.”

“As if you were still twenty years of age, and wearing that absurd blue coat?”

“Oh better far! I love you thus, and I also love you”--she looked at me with keen apprehension--“as you loved your aunt.”

“I am happy! You dispel my terrors,” she said, returning towards the family, who were surprised at our private conference. “Be still a child at Clochegourde--for you are one still. It may be your policy to be a man with the king, but here, let me tell you, monsieur, your best policy is to remain a child. As a child you shall be loved. I can resist a man, but to a child I can refuse nothing, nothing! He can ask for nothing I will not give him.--Our secrets are all told,” she said, looking at the count with a mischievous air, in which her girlish, natural self reappeared. “I leave you now; I must go and dress.”

Never for three years had I heard her voice so richly happy. For the first time I heard those swallow cries, the infantile notes of which I told you. I had brought Jacques a hunting outfit, and for Madeleine a work-box--which her mother afterwards used. The joy of the two children, delighted to show their presents to each other, seemed to annoy the count, always dissatisfied when attention was withdrawn from himself. I made a sign to Madeleine and followed her father, who wanted to talk to me of his ailments.

“My poor Felix,” he said, “you see how happy and well they all are. I am the shadow on the picture; all their ills are transferred to me, and I bless God that it is so. Formerly I did not know what was the matter with me; now I know. The orifice of my stomach is affected; I can digest nothing.”

“How do you come to be as wise as the professor of a medical school?” I asked, laughing. “Is your doctor indiscreet enough to tell you such things?”

“God forbid I should consult a doctor,” he cried, showing the aversion most imaginary invalids feel for the medical profession.

I now listened to much crazy talk, in the course of which he made the most absurd confidences,--complained of his wife, of the servants, of the children, of life, evidently pleased to repeat his daily speeches to a friend who, not having heard them daily, might be alarmed, and who at any rate was forced to listen out of politeness. He must have been satisfied, for I paid him the utmost attention, trying to penetrate his inconceivable nature, and to guess what new tortures he had been inflicting on his wife, of which she had not written to me. Henriette presently put an end to the monologue by appearing in the portico. The count saw her, shook his head, and said to me: “You listen to me, Felix; but here no one pities me.”

He went away, as if aware of the constraint he imposed on my intercourse with Henriette, or perhaps from a really chivalrous consideration for her, knowing he could give her pleasure by leaving us alone. His character exhibited contradictions that were often inexplicable; he was jealous, like all weak beings, but his confidence in his wife’s sanctity was boundless. It may have been the sufferings of his own self-esteem, wounded by the superiority of that lofty virtue, which made him so eager to oppose every wish of the poor woman, whom he braved as children brave their masters or their mothers.

Jacques was taking his lessons, and Madeleine was being dressed; I had therefore a whole hour to walk with the countess alone on the terrace.

“Dear angel!” I said, “the chains are heavier, the sands hotter, the thorns grow apace.”

“Hush!” she said, guessing the thoughts my conversation with the count had suggested. “You are here, and all is forgotten! I don’t suffer; I have never suffered.”

She made a few light steps as if to shake her dress and give to the breeze its ruches of snowy tulle, its floating sleeves and fresh ribbons, the laces of her pelerine, and the flowing curls of her coiffure a la Sevigne; I saw her for the first time a young girl,--gay with her natural gaiety, ready to frolic like a child. I knew then the meaning of tears of happiness; I knew the joy a man feels in bringing happiness to another.

“Sweet human flower, wooed by my thought, kissed by my soul, oh my lily!” I cried, “untouched, untouchable upon thy stem, white, proud, fragrant, and solitary--”

“Enough, enough,” she said, smiling. “Speak to me of yourself; tell me everything.”

Then, beneath the swaying arch of quivering leaves, we had a long conversation, filled with interminable parentheses, subjects taken, dropped, and retaken, in which I told her my life and my occupations; I even described my apartment in Paris, for she wished to know everything; and (happiness then unappreciated) I had nothing to conceal. Knowing thus my soul and all the details of a daily life full of incessant toil, learning the full extent of my functions, which to any one not sternly upright offered opportunities for deception and dishonest gains, but which I had exercised with such rigid honor that the king, I told her, called me Mademoiselle de Vandenesse, she seized my hand and kissed it, and dropped a tear, a tear of joy, upon it.

This sudden transposition of our roles, this homage, coupled with the thought--swiftly expressed but as swiftly comprehended--“Here is the master I have sought, here is my dream embodied!” all that there was of avowal in the action, grand in its humility, where love betrayed itself in a region forbidden to the senses,--this whirlwind of celestial things fell on my heart and crushed it. I felt myself too small; I wished to die at her feet.

“Ah!” I said, “you surpass us in all things. Can you doubt me?--for you did doubt me just now, Henriette.”

“Not now,” she answered, looking at me with ineffable tenderness, which, for a moment, veiled the light of her eyes. “But seeing you so changed, so handsome, I said to myself, ‘Our plans for Madeleine will be defeated by some woman who will guess the treasures in his heart; she will steal our Felix, and destroy all happiness here.’”

“Always Madeleine!” I replied. “Is it Madeleine to whom I am faithful?”

We fell into a silence which Monsieur de Mortsauf inconveniently interrupted. I was forced to keep up a conversation bristling with difficulties, in which my honest replies as to the king’s policy jarred with the count’s ideas, and he forced me to explain again and again the king’s intentions. In spite of all my questions as to his horses, his agricultural affairs, whether he was satisfied with his five farms, whether he meant to cut the timber of the old avenue, he returned to the subject of politics with the pestering faculty of an old maid and the persistency of a child. Minds like his prefer to dash themselves against the light; they return again and again and hum about it without ever getting into it, like those big flies which weary our ears as they buzz upon the glass.

Henriette was silent. To stop the conversation, in which I feared my young blood might take fire, I answered in monosyllables, mostly acquiescent, avoiding discussion; but Monsieur de Mortsauf had too much sense not to perceive the meaning of my politeness. Presently he was angry at being always in the right; he grew refractory, his eyebrows and the wrinkles of his forehead worked, his yellow eyes blazed, his rufous nose grew redder, as it did on the day I first witnessed an attack of madness. Henriette gave me a supplicating look, making me understand that she could not employ on my behalf an authority to which she had recourse to protect her children. I at once answered the count seriously, taking up the political question, and managing his peevish spirit with the utmost care.

“Poor dear! poor dear!” she murmured two or three times; the words reaching my ear like a gentle breeze. When she could intervene with success she said, interrupting us, “Let me tell you, gentlemen, that you are very dull company.”

Recalled by this conversation to his chivalrous sense of what was due to a woman, the count ceased to talk politics, and as we bored him in our turn by commonplace matters, he presently left us to continue our walk, declaring that it made his head spin to go round and round on the same path.

My sad conjectures were true. The soft landscape, the warm atmosphere, the cloudless skies, the soothing poetry of this valley, which for fifteen years had calmed the stinging fancies of that diseased mind, were now impotent. At a period of life when the asperities of other men are softened and their angles smoothed, the disposition of this man became more and more aggressive. For the last few months he had taken a habit of contradicting for the sake of contradiction, without reason, without even trying to justify his opinions; he insisted on knowing the why and the wherefore of everything; grew restless under a delay or an omission; meddled with every item of the household affairs, and compelled his wife and the servants to render him the most minute and fatiguing account of all that was done; never allowing them the slightest freedom of action. Formerly he did not lose his temper except for some special reason; now his irritation was constant. Perhaps the care of his farms, the interests of agriculture, an active out-door life had formerly soothed his atrabilious temper by giving it a field for its uneasiness, and by furnishing employment for his activity. Possibly the loss of such occupation had allowed his malady to prey upon itself; no longer exercised on matters without, it was showing itself in more fixed ideas; the moral being was laying hold of the physical being. He had lately become his own doctor; he studied medical books, fancied he had the diseases he read of, and took the most extraordinary and unheard of precautions about his health,--precautions never the same, impossible to foresee, and consequently impossible to satisfy. Sometimes he wanted no noise; then, when the countess had succeeded in establishing absolute silence, he would declare he was in a tomb, and blame her for not finding some medium between incessant noise and the stillness of La Trappe. Sometimes he affected a perfect indifference for all earthly things. Then the whole household breathed freely; the children played; family affairs went on without criticism. Suddenly he would cry out lamentably, “They want to kill me!--My dear,” he would say to his wife, increasing the injustice of his words by the aggravating tones of his sharp voice, “if it concerned your children you would know very well what was the matter with them.”

He dressed and re-dressed himself incessantly, watching every change of temperature, and doing nothing without consulting the barometer. Notwithstanding his wife’s attentions, he found no food to suit him, his stomach being, he said, impaired, and digestion so painful as to keep him awake all night. In spite of this he ate, drank, digested, and slept, in a manner to satisfy any doctor. His capricious will exhausted the patience of the servants, accustomed to the beaten track of domestic service and unable to conform to the requirements of his conflicting orders. Sometimes he bade them keep all the windows open, declaring that his health required a current of fresh air; a few days later the fresh air, being too hot or too damp, as the case might be, became intolerable; then he scolded, quarrelled with the servants, and in order to justify himself, denied his former orders. This defect of memory, or this bad faith, call it which you will, always carried the day against his wife in the arguments by which she tried to pit him against himself. Life at Clochegourde had become so intolerable that the Abbe Dominis, a man of great learning, took refuge in the study of scientific problems, and withdrew into the shelter of pretended abstraction. The countess had no longer any hope of hiding the secret of these insane furies within the circle of her own home; the servants had witnessed scenes of exasperation without exciting cause, in which the premature old man passed the bounds of reason. They were, however, so devoted to the countess that nothing so far had transpired outside; but she dreaded daily some public outburst of a frenzy no longer controlled by respect for opinion.

Later I learned the dreadful details of the count’s treatment of his wife. Instead of supporting her when the children were ill, he assailed her with dark predictions and made her responsible for all future illnesses, because she refused to let the children take the crazy doses which he prescribed. When she went to walk with them the count would predict a storm in the face of a clear sky; if by chance the prediction proved true, the satisfaction he felt made him quite indifferent to any harm to the children. If one of them was ailing, the count gave his whole mind to fastening the cause of the illness upon the system of nursing adopted by his wife, whom he carped at for every trifling detail, always ending with the cruel words, “If your children fall ill again you have only yourself to thank for it.”

He behaved in the same way in the management of the household, seeing the worst side of everything, and making himself, as his old coachman said, “the devil’s own advocate.” The countess arranged that Jacques and Madeleine should take their meals alone at different hours from the family, so as to save them from the count’s outbursts and draw all the storms upon herself. In this way the children now saw but little of their father. By one of the hallucinations peculiar to selfish persons, the count had not the slightest idea of the misery he caused. In the confidential communication he made to me on my arrival he particularly dwelt on his goodness to his family. He wielded the flail, beat, bruised, and broke everything about him as a monkey might have done. Then, having half-destroyed his prey, he denied having touched it. I now understood the lines on Henriette’s forehead,--fine lines, traced as it were with the edge of a razor, which I had noticed the moment I saw her. There is a pudicity in noble minds which withholds them from speaking of their personal sufferings; proudly they hide the extent of their woes from hearts that love them, feeling a merciful joy in doing so. Therefore in spite of my urgency, I did not immediately obtain the truth from Henriette. She feared to grieve me; she made brief admissions, and then blushed for them; but I soon perceived myself the increase of trouble which the count’s present want of regular occupation had brought upon the household.

“Henriette,” I said, after I had been there some days, “don’t you think you have made a mistake in so arranging the estate that the count has no longer anything to do?”

“Dear,” she said, smiling, “my situation is critical enough to take all my attention; believe me, I have considered all my resources, and they are now exhausted. It is true that the bickerings are getting worse and worse. As Monsieur de Mortsauf and I are always together, I cannot lessen them by diverting his attention in other directions; in fact the pain would be the same to me in any case. I did think of advising him to start a nursery for silk-worms at Clochegourde, where we have many mulberry-trees, remains of the old industry of Touraine. But I reflected that he would still be the same tyrant at home, and I should have many more annoyances through the enterprise. You will learn, my dear observer, that in youth a man’s ill qualities are restrained by society, checked in their swing by the play of passions, subdued under the fear of public opinion; later, a middle-aged man, living in solitude, shows his native defects, which are all the more terrible because so long repressed. Human weaknesses are essentially base; they allow of neither peace nor truce; what you yield to them to-day they exact to-morrow, and always; they fasten on concessions and compel more of them. Power, on the other hand, is merciful; it conforms to evidence, it is just and it is peaceable. But the passions born of weakness are implacable. Monsieur de Mortsauf takes an absolute pleasure in getting the better of me; and he who would deceive no one else, deceives me with delight.”

One morning as we left the breakfast table, about a month after my arrival, the countess took me by the arm, darted through an iron gate which led into the vineyard, and dragged me hastily among the vines.

“He will kill me!” she cried. “And I want to live--for my children’s sake. But oh! not a day’s respite! Always to walk among thorns! to come near falling every instant! every instant to have to summon all my strength to keep my balance! No human being can long endure such strain upon the system. If I were certain of the ground I ought to take, if my resistance could be a settled thing, then my mind might concentrate upon it--but no, every day the attacks change character and leave me without defence; my sorrows are not one, they are manifold. Ah! my friend--” she cried, leaning her head upon my shoulder, and not continuing her confidence. “What will become of me? Oh, what shall I do?” she said presently, struggling with thoughts she did not express. “How can I resist? He will kill me! No, I will kill myself--but that would be a crime! Escape? yes, but my children! Separate from him? how, after fifteen years of marriage, how could I ever tell my parents that I will not live with him? for if my father and mother came here he would be calm, polite, intelligent, judicious. Besides, can married women look to fathers or mothers? Do they not belong body and soul to their husbands? I could live tranquil if not happy--I have found strength in my chaste solitude, I admit it; but if I am deprived of this negative happiness I too shall become insane. My resistance is based on powerful reasons which are not personal to myself. It is a crime to give birth to poor creatures condemned to endless suffering. Yet my position raises serious questions, so serious that I dare not decide them alone; I cannot be judge and party both. To-morrow I will go to Tours and consult my new confessor, the Abbe Birotteau--for my dear and virtuous Abbe de la Berge is dead,” she said, interrupting herself. “Though he was severe, I miss and shall always miss his apostolic power. His successor is an angel of goodness, who pities but does not reprimand. Still, all courage draws fresh life from the heart of religion; what soul is not strengthened by the voice of the Holy Spirit? My God,” she said, drying her tears and raising her eyes to heaven, “for what sin am I thus punished?--I believe, yes, Felix, I believe it, we must pass through a fiery furnace before we reach the saints, the just made perfect of the upper spheres. Must I keep silence? Am I forbidden, oh, my God, to cry to the heart of a friend? Do I love him too well?” She pressed me to her heart as though she feared to lose me. “Who will solve my doubts? My conscience does not reproach me. The stars shine from above on men; may not the soul, the human star, shed its light upon a friend, if we go to him with pure thoughts?”

I listened to this dreadful cry in silence, holding her moist hand in mine that was still more moist. I pressed it with a force to which Henriette replied with an equal pressure.

“Where are you?” cried the count, who came towards us, bareheaded.

Ever since my return he had insisted on sharing our interviews,--either because he wanted amusement, or feared the countess would tell me her sorrows and complain to me, or because he was jealous of a pleasure he did not share.

“How he follows me!” she cried, in a tone of despair. “Let us go into the orchard, we shall escape him. We can stoop as we run by the hedge, and he will not see us.”

We made the hedge a rampart and reached the enclosure, where we were soon at a good distance from the count in an alley of almond-trees.

“Dear Henriette,” I then said to her, pressing her arm against my heart and stopping to contemplate her in her sorrow, “you have guided me with true knowledge along the perilous ways of the great world; let me in return give you some advice which may help you to end this duel without witnesses, in which you must inevitably be worsted, for you are fighting with unequal weapons. You must not struggle any longer with a madman--”

“Hush!” she said, dashing aside the tears that rolled from her eyes.

“Listen to me, dear,” I continued. “After a single hour’s talk with the count, which I force myself to endure for love of you, my thoughts are bewildered, my head heavy; he makes me doubtful of my own intellect; the same ideas repeated over and over again seem to burn themselves on my brain. Well-defined monomanias are not communicated; but when the madness consists in a distorted way of looking at everything, and when it lurks under all discussions, then it can and does injure the minds of those who live with it. Your patience is sublime, but will it not end in disordering you? For your sake, for that of your children, change your system with the count. Your adorable kindness has made him selfish; you have treated him as a mother treats the child she spoils; but now, if you want to live--and you do want it,” I said, looking at her, “use the control you have over him. You know what it is; he loves you and he fears you; make him fear you more; oppose his erratic will with your firm will. Extend your power over him, confine his madness to a moral sphere just as we lock maniacs in a cell.”

“Dear child,” she said, smiling bitterly, “a woman without a heart might do it. But I am a mother; I should make a poor jailer. Yes, I can suffer, but I cannot make others suffer. Never!” she said, “never! not even to obtain some great and honorable result. Besides, I should have to lie in my heart, disguise my voice, lower my head, degrade my gesture--do not ask of me such falsehoods. I can stand between Monsieur de Mortsauf and his children, I willingly receive his blows that they may not fall on others; I can do all that, and will do it to conciliate conflicting interests, but I can do no more.”

“Let me worship thee, O saint, thrice holy!” I exclaimed, kneeling at her feet and kissing her robe, with which I wiped my tears. “But if he kills you?” I cried.

She turned pale and said, lifting her eyes to heaven:

“God’s will be done!”

“Do you know that the king said to your father, ‘So that devil of a Mortsauf is still living’?”

“A jest on the lips of the king,” she said, “is a crime when repeated here.”

In spite of our precautions the count had tracked us; he now arrived, bathed in perspiration, and sat down under a walnut-tree where the countess had stopped to give me that rebuke. I began to talk about the vintage; the count was silent, taking no notice of the dampness under the tree. After a few insignificant remarks, interspersed with pauses that were very significant, he complained of nausea and headache; but he spoke gently, and did not appeal to our pity, or describe his sufferings in his usual exaggerated way. We paid no attention to him. When we reached the house, he said he felt worse and should go to bed; which he did, quite naturally and with much less complaint than usual. We took advantage of the respite and went down to our dear terrace accompanied by Madeleine.

“Let us get that boat and go upon the river,” said the countess after we had made a few turns. “We might go and look at the fishing which is going on to-day.”

We went out by the little gate, found the punt, jumped into it and were presently paddling up the Loire. Like three children amused with trifles, we looked at the sedges along the banks and the blue and green dragon-flies; the countess wondered perhaps that she was able to enjoy such peaceful pleasures in the midst of her poignant griefs; but Nature’s calm, indifferent to our struggles, has a magic gift of consolation. The tumults of a love full of restrained desires harmonize with the wash of the water; the flowers that the hand of man has never wilted are the voice of his secret dreams; the voluptuous swaying of the boat vaguely responds to the thoughts that are floating in his soul. We felt the languid influence of this double poesy. Words, tuned to the diapason of nature, disclosed mysterious graces; looks were impassioned rays sharing the light shed broadcast by the sun on the glowing meadows. The river was a path along which we flew. Our spirit, no longer kept down by the measured tread of our footsteps, took possession of the universe. The abounding joy of a child at liberty, graceful in its motions, enticing in its play, is the living expression of two freed souls, delighting themselves by becoming ideally the wondrous being dreamed of by Plato and known to all whose youth has been filled with a blessed love. To describe to you that hour, not in its indescribable details but in its essence, I must say to you that we loved each other in all the creations animate and inanimate which surrounded us; we felt without us the happiness our own hearts craved; it so penetrated our being that the countess took off her gloves and let her hands float in the water as if to cool an inward ardor. Her eyes spoke; but her mouth, opening like a rose to the breeze, gave voice to no desire. You know the harmony of deep tones mingling perfectly with high ones? Ever, when I hear it now, it recalls to me the harmony of our two souls in this one hour, which never came again.

“Where do you fish?” I asked, “if you can only do so from the banks you own?”

“Near Pont-de-Ruan,” she replied. “Ah! we now own the river from Pont-de-Ruan to Clochegourde; Monsieur de Mortsauf has lately bought forty acres of the meadow lands with the savings of two years and the arrearage of his pension. Does that surprise you?”

“Surprise me?” I cried; “I would that all the valley were yours.” She answered me with a smile. Presently we came below the bridge to a place where the Indre widens and where the fishing was going on.

“Well, Martineau?” she said.

“Ah, Madame la comtesse, such bad luck! We have fished up from the mill the last three hours, and have taken nothing.”

We landed near them to watch the drawing in of the last net, and all three of us sat down in the shade of a “bouillard,” a sort of poplar with a white bark, which grows on the banks of the Danube and the Loire (probably on those of other large rivers), and sheds, in the spring of the year, a white and silky fluff, the covering of its flower. The countess had recovered her august serenity; she half regretted the unveiling of her griefs, and mourned that she had cried aloud like Job, instead of weeping like the Magdalen,--a Magdalen without loves, or galas, or prodigalities, but not without beauty and fragrance. The net came in at her feet full of fish; tench, barbels, pike, perch, and an enormous carp, which floundered about on the grass.

“Madame brings luck!” exclaimed the keeper.

All the laborers opened their eyes as they looked with admiration at the woman whose fairy wand seemed to have touched the nets. Just then the huntsman was seen urging his horse over the meadows at a full gallop. Fear took possession of her. Jacques was not with us, and the mother’s first thought, as Virgil so poetically says, is to press her children to her breast when danger threatens.

“Jacques! Where is Jacques? What has happened to my boy?”

She did not love me! If she had loved me I should have seen upon her face when confronted with my sufferings that expression of a lioness in despair.

“Madame la comtesse, Monsieur le comte is worse.”

She breathed more freely and started to run towards Clochegourde, followed by me and by Madeleine.

“Follow me slowly,” she said, looking back; “don’t let the dear child overheat herself. You see how it is; Monsieur de Mortsauf took that walk in the sun which put him into a perspiration, and sitting under the walnut-tree may be the cause of a great misfortune.”

The words, said in the midst of her agitation, showed plainly the purity of her soul. The death of the count a misfortune! She reached Clochegourde with great rapidity, passing through a gap in the wall and crossing the fields. I returned slowly. Henriette’s words lighted my mind, but as the lightning falls and blasts the gathered harvest. On the river I had fancied I was her chosen one; now I felt bitterly the sincerity of her words. The lover who is not everything is nothing. I loved with the desire of a love that knows what it seeks; which feeds in advance on coming transports, and is content with the pleasures of the soul because it mingles with them others which the future keeps in store. If Henriette loved, it was certain that she knew neither the pleasures of love nor its tumults. She lived by feelings only, like a saint with God. I was the object on which her thoughts fastened as bees swarm upon the branch of a flowering tree. In my mad jealousy I reproached myself that I had dared nothing, that I had not tightened the bonds of a tenderness which seemed to me at that moment more subtile than real, by the chains of positive possession.

The count’s illness, caused perhaps by a chill under the walnut-tree, became alarming in a few hours. I went to Tours for a famous doctor named Origet, but was unable to find him until evening. He spent that night and the next day at Clochegourde. We had sent the huntsman in quest of leeches, but the doctor, thinking the case urgent, wished to bleed the count immediately, but had brought no lancet with him. I at once started for Azay in the midst of a storm, roused a surgeon, Monsieur Deslandes, and compelled him to come with the utmost celerity to Clochegourde. Ten minutes later and the count would have died; the bleeding saved him. But in spite of this preliminary success the doctor predicted an inflammatory fever of the worst kind. The countess was overcome by the fear that she was the secret cause of this crisis. Too weak to thank me for my exertions, she merely gave me a few smiles, the equivalent of the kiss she had once laid upon my hand. Fain would I have seen in those haggard smiles the remorse of illicit love; but no, they were only the act of contrition of an innocent repentance, painful to see in one so pure, the expression of admiring tenderness for me whom she regarded as noble while reproaching herself for an imaginary wrong. Surely she loved as Laura loved Petrarch, and not as Francesca da Rimini loved Paolo,--a terrible discovery for him who had dreamed the union of the two loves.

The countess half lay, her body bent forwards, her arms hanging, in a soiled armchair in a room that was like the lair of a wild boar. The next evening before the doctor departed he said to the countess, who had sat up the night before, that she must get a nurse, as the illness would be a long one.

“A nurse!” she said; “no, no! We will take care of him,” she added, looking at me; “we owe it to ourselves to save him.”

The doctor gave us both an observing look full of astonishment. The words were of a nature to make him suspect an atonement. He promised to come twice a week, left directions for the treatment with Monsieur Deslandes, and pointed out the threatening symptoms that might oblige us to send for him. I asked the countess to let me sit up the alternate nights and then, not without difficulty, I persuaded her to go to bed on the third night. When the house was still and the count sleeping I heard a groan from Henriette’s room. My anxiety was so keen that I went to her. She was kneeling before the crucifix bathed in tears. “My God!” she cried; “if this be the cost of a murmur, I will never complain again.”

“You have left him!” she said on seeing me.

“I heard you moaning, and I was frightened.”

“Oh, I!” she said; “I am well.”

Wishing to be certain that Monsieur de Mortsauf was asleep she came down with me; by the light of the lamp we looked at him. The count was weakened by the loss of blood and was more drowsy than asleep; his hands picked the counterpane and tried to draw it over him.

“They say the dying do that,” she whispered. “Ah! if he were to die of this illness, that I have caused, never will I marry again, I swear it,” she said, stretching her hand over his head with a solemn gesture.

“I have done all I could to save him,” I said.

“Oh, you!” she said, “you are good; it is I who am guilty.”

She stooped to that discolored brow, wiped the perspiration from it and laid a kiss there solemnly; but I saw, not without joy, that she did it as an expiation.

“Blanche, I am thirsty,” said the count in a feeble voice.

“You see he knows me,” she said giving him to drink.

Her accent, her affectionate manner to him seemed to me to take the feelings that bound us together and immolate them to the sick man.

“Henriette,” I said, “go and rest, I entreat you.”

“No more Henriette,” she said, interrupting me with imperious haste.

“Go to bed if you would not be ill. Your children, he himself would order you to be careful; it is a case where selfishness becomes a virtue.”

“Yes,” she said.

She went away, recommending her husband to my care by a gesture which would have seemed like approaching delirium if childlike grace had not been mingled with the supplicating forces of repentance. But the scene was terrible, judged by the habitual state of that pure soul; it alarmed me; I feared the exaltation of her conscience. When the doctor came again, I revealed to him the nature of my pure Henriette’s self-reproach. This confidence, made discreetly, removed Monsieur Origet’s suspicions, and enabled him to quiet the distress of that noble soul by telling her that in any case the count had to pass through this crisis, and that as for the nut-tree, his remaining there had done more good than harm by developing the disease.

For fifty-two days the count hovered between life and death. Henriette and I each watched twenty-six nights. Undoubtedly, Monsieur de Mortsauf owed his life to our nursing and to the careful exactitude with which we carried out the orders of Monsieur Origet. Like all philosophical physicians, whose sagacious observation of what passes before them justifies many a doubt of noble actions when they are only the accomplishment of a duty, this man, while assisting the countess and me in our rivalry of devotion, could not help watching us, with scrutinizing glances, so afraid was he of being deceived in his admiration.

“In diseases of this nature,” he said to me at his third visit, “death has a powerful auxiliary in the moral nature when that is seriously disturbed, as it is in this case. The doctor, the family, the nurses hold the patient’s life in their hands; sometimes a single word, a fear expressed by a gesture, has the effect of poison.”

As he spoke Origet studied my face and expression; but he saw in my eyes the clear look of an honest soul. In fact during the whole course of this distressing illness there never passed through my mind a single one of the involuntary evil thoughts which do sometimes sear the consciences of the innocent. To those who study nature in its grandeur as a whole all tends to unity through assimilation. The moral world must undoubtedly be ruled by an analogous principle. In an pure sphere all is pure. The atmosphere of heaven was around my Henriette; it seemed as though an evil desire must forever part me from her. Thus she not only stood for happiness, but for virtue; she was virtue. Finding us always equally careful and attentive, the doctor’s words and manners took a tone of respect and even pity; he seemed to say to himself, “Here are the real sufferers; they hide their ills, and forget them.” By a fortunate change, which, according to our excellent doctor, is common enough in men who are completely shattered, Monsieur de Mortsauf was patient, obedient, complained little, and showed surprising docility,--he, who when well never did the simplest thing without discussion. The secret of this submission to medical care, which he formerly so derided, was an innate dread of death; another contradiction in a man of tried courage. This dread may perhaps explain several other peculiarities in the character which the cruel years of exile had developed.

Shall I admit to you, Natalie, and will you believe me? these fifty days and the month that followed them were the happiest moments of my life. Love, in the celestial spaces of the soul is like a noble river flowing through a valley; the rains, the brooks, the torrents hie to it, the trees fall upon its surface, so do the flowers, the gravel of its shores, the rocks of the summits; storms and the loitering tribute of the crystal streams alike increase it. Yes, when love comes all comes to love!

The first great danger over, the countess and I grew accustomed to illness. In spite of the confusion which the care of the sick entails, the count’s room, once so untidy, was now clean and inviting. Soon we were like two beings flung upon a desert island, for not only do anxieties isolate, but they brush aside as petty the conventions of the world. The welfare of the sick man obliged us to have points of contact which no other circumstances would have authorized. Many a time our hands, shy or timid formerly, met in some service that we rendered to the count--was I not there to sustain and help my Henriette? Absorbed in a duty comparable to that of a soldier at the pickets, she forgot to eat; then I served her, sometimes on her lap, a hasty meal which necessitated a thousand little attentions. We were like children at a grave. She would order me sharply to prepare whatever might ease the sick man’s suffering; she employed me in a hundred petty ways. During the time when actual danger obscured, as it does during the battle, the subtile distinctions which characterize the facts of ordinary life, she necessarily laid aside the reserve which all women, even the most unconventional, preserve in their looks and words and actions before the world or their own family. At the first chirping of the birds she would come to relieve my watch, wearing a morning garment which revealed to me once more the dazzling treasures that in my folly I had treated as my own. Always dignified, nay imposing, she could still be familiar.

Thus it came to pass that we found ourselves unconsciously intimate, half-married as it were. She showed herself nobly confiding, as sure of me as she was of herself. I was thus taken deeper and deeper into her heart. The countess became once more my Henriette, Henriette constrained to love with increasing strength the friend who endeavored to be her second soul. Her hand unresistingly met mine at the least solicitation; my eyes were permitted to follow with delight the lines of her beauty during the long hours when we listened to the count’s breathing, without driving her from their sight. The meagre pleasures which we allowed ourselves--sympathizing looks, words spoken in whispers not to wake the count, hopes and fears repeated and again repeated, in short, the thousand incidents of the fusion of two hearts long separated--stand out in bright array upon the sombre background of the actual scene. Our souls knew each other to their depths under this test, which many a warm affection is unable to bear, finding life too heavy or too flimsy in the close bonds of hourly intercourse.

You know what disturbance follows the illness of a master; how the affairs of life seem to come to a standstill. Though the real care of the family and estate fell upon Madame de Mortsauf, the count was useful in his way; he talked with the farmers, transacted business with his bailiff, and received the rents; if she was the soul, he was the body. I now made myself her steward so that she could nurse the count without neglecting the property. She accepted this as a matter of course, in fact without thanking me. It was another sweet communion to share her family cares, to transmit her orders. In the evenings we often met in her room to discuss these interests and those of her children. Such conversations gave one semblance the more to our transitory marriage. With what delight she encouraged me to take a husband’s place, giving me his seat at table, sending me to talk with the bailiff,--all in perfect innocence, yet not without that inward pleasure the most virtuous woman in the world will feel when she finds a course where strict obedience to duty and the satisfaction of her wishes are combined.

Nullified, as it were, by illness, the count no longer oppressed his wife or his household, the countess then became her natural self; she busied herself with my affairs and showed me a thousand kindnesses. With what joy I discovered in her mind a thought, vaguely conceived perhaps, but exquisitely expressed, namely, to show me the full value of her person and her qualities and make me see the change that would come over her if she lived understood. This flower, kept in the cold atmosphere of such a home, opened to my gaze, and to mine only; she took as much delight in letting me comprehend her as I felt in studying her with the searching eyes of love. She proved to me in all the trifling things of daily life how much I was in her thoughts. When, after my turn of watching, I went to bed and slept late, Henriette would keep the house absolutely silent near me; Jacques and Madeleine played elsewhere, though never ordered to do so; she invented excuses to serve my breakfast herself--ah, with what sparkling pleasure in her movements, what swallow-like rapidity, what lynx-eyed perception! and then! what carnation on her cheeks, what quiverings in her voice!

Can such expansions of the soul be described in words?

Often she was wearied out; but if, at such moments of lassitude my welfare came in question, for me, as for her children, she found fresh strength and sprang up eagerly and joyfully. How she loved to shed her tenderness like sunbeams in the air! Ah, Natalie, some women share the privileges of angels here below; they diffuse that light which Saint-Martin, the mysterious philosopher, declared to be intelligent, melodious, and perfumed. Sure of my discretion, Henriette took pleasure in raising the curtain which hid the future and in showing me two women in her,--the woman bound hand and foot who had won me in spite of her severity, and the woman freed, whose sweetness should make my love eternal! What a difference. Madame de Mortsauf was the skylark of Bengal, transported to our cold Europe, mournful on its perch, silent and dying in the cage of a naturalist; Henriette was the singing bird of oriental poems in groves beside the Ganges, flying from branch to branch like a living jewel amid the roses of a volkameria that ever blooms. Her beauty grew more beautiful, her mind recovered strength. The continual sparkle of this happiness was a secret between ourselves, for she dreaded the eye of the Abbe Dominis, the representative of the world; she masked her contentment with playfulness, and covered the proofs of her tenderness with the banner of gratitude.

“We have put your friendship to a severe test, Felix; we may give you the same rights we give to Jacques, may we not, Monsieur l’abbe?” she said one day.

The stern abbe answered with the smile of a man who can read the human heart and see its purity; for the countess he always showed the respect mingled with adoration which the angels inspire. Twice during those fifty days the countess passed beyond the limits in which we held our affection. But even these infringements were shrouded in a veil, never lifted until the final hour when avowal came. One morning, during the first days of the count’s illness, when she repented her harsh treatment in withdrawing the innocent privileges she had formerly granted me, I was expecting her to relieve my watch. Much fatigued, I fell asleep, my head against the wall. I wakened suddenly at the touch of something cool upon my forehead which gave me a sensation as if a rose had rested there. I opened my eyes and saw the countess, standing a few steps distant, who said, “I have just come.” I rose to leave the room, but as I bade her good-bye I took her hand; it was moist and trembling.

“Are you ill?” I said.

“Why do you ask that question?” she replied.

I looked at her blushing and confused. “I was dreaming,” I replied.

Another time, when Monsieur Origet had announced positively that the count was convalescent, I was lying with Jacques and Madeleine on the step of the portico intent on a game of spillikins which we were playing with bits of straw and hooks made of pins; Monsieur de Mortsauf was asleep. The doctor, while waiting for his horse to be harnessed, was talking with the countess in the salon. Monsieur Origet went away without my noticing his departure. After he left, Henriette leaned against the window, from which she watched us for some time without our seeing her. It was one of those warm evenings when the sky is copper-colored and the earth sends up among the echoes a myriad mingling noises. A last ray of sunlight was leaving the roofs, the flowers in the garden perfumed the air, the bells of the cattle returning to their stalls sounded in the distance. We were all conforming to the silence of the evening hour and hushing our voices that we might not wake the count. Suddenly, I heard the guttural sound of a sob violently suppressed; I rushed into the salon and found the countess sitting by the window with her handkerchief to her face. She heard my step and made me an imperious gesture, commanding me to leave her. I went up to her, my heart stabbed with fear, and tried to take her handkerchief away by force. Her face was bathed in tears and she fled into her room, which she did not leave again until the hour for evening prayer. When that was over, I led her to the terrace and asked the cause of her emotion; she affected a wild gaiety and explained it by the news Monsieur Origet had given her.

“Henriette, Henriette, you knew that news when I saw you weeping. Between you and me a lie is monstrous. Why did you forbid me to dry your tears? were they mine?”

“I was thinking,” she said, “that for me this illness has been a halt in pain. Now that I no longer fear for Monsieur de Mortsauf I fear for myself.”

She was right. The count’s recovery was soon attested by the return of his fantastic humor. He began by saying that neither the countess, nor I, nor the doctor had known how to take care of him; we were ignorant of his constitution and also of his disease; we misunderstood his sufferings and the necessary remedies. Origet, infatuated with his own doctrines, had mistaken the case, he ought to have attended only to the pylorus. One day he looked at us maliciously, with an air of having guessed our thoughts, and said to his wife with a smile, “Now, my dear, if I had died you would have regretted me, no doubt, but pray admit you would have been quite resigned.”

“Yes, I should have mourned you in pink and black, court mourning,” she answered laughing, to change the tone of his remarks.

But it was chiefly about his food, which the doctor insisted on regulating, that scenes of violence and wrangling now took place, unlike any that had hitherto occurred; for the character of the count was all the more violent for having slumbered. The countess, fortified by the doctor’s orders and the obedience of her servants, stimulated too by me, who thought this struggle a good means to teach her to exercise authority over the count, held out against his violence. She showed a calm front to his demented cries, and even grew accustomed to his insulting epithets, taking him for what he was, a child. I had the happiness of at last seeing her take the reins in hand and govern that unsound mind. The count cried out, but he obeyed; and he obeyed all the better when he had made an outcry. But in spite of the evidence of good results, Henriette often wept at the spectacle of this emaciated, feeble old man, with a forehead yellower than the falling leaves, his eyes wan, his hands trembling. She blamed herself for too much severity, and could not resist the joy she saw in his eyes when, in measuring out his food, she gave him more than the doctor allowed. She was even more gentle and gracious to him than she had been to me; but there were differences here which filled my heart with joy. She was not unwearying, and she sometimes called her servants to wait upon the count when his caprices changed too rapidly, and he complained of not being understood.

The countess wished to return thanks to God for the count’s recovery; she directed a mass to be said, and asked if I would take her to church. I did so, but I left her at the door, and went to see Monsieur and Madame Chessel. On my return she reproached me.

“Henriette,” I said, “I cannot be false. I will throw myself into the water to save my enemy from drowning, and give him my coat to keep him warm; I will forgive him, but I cannot forget the wrong.”

She was silent, but she pressed my arm.

“You are an angel, and you were sincere in your thanksgiving,” I said, continuing. “The mother of the Prince of the Peace was saved from the hands of an angry populace who sought to kill her, and when the queen asked, ‘What did you do?’ she answered, ‘I prayed for them.’ Women are ever thus. I am a man, and necessarily imperfect.”

“Don’t calumniate yourself,” she said, shaking my arm, “perhaps you are more worthy than I.”

“Yes,” I replied, “for I would give eternity for a day of happiness, and you--”

“I!” she said haughtily.

I was silent and lowered my eyes to escape the lightning of hers.

“There is many an I in me,” she said. “Of which do you speak? Those children,” pointing to Jacques and Madeleine, “are one--Felix,” she cried in a heartrending voice, “do you think me selfish? Ought I to sacrifice eternity to reward him who devotes to me his life? The thought is dreadful; it wounds every sentiment of religion. Could a woman so fallen rise again? Would her happiness absolve her? These are questions you force me to consider.--Yes, I betray at last the secret of my conscience; the thought has traversed my heart; often do I expiate it by penance; it caused the tears you asked me to account for yesterday--”

“Do you not give too great importance to certain things which common women hold at a high price, and--”

“Oh!” she said, interrupting me; “do you hold them at a lower?”

This logic stopped all argument.

“Know this,” she continued. “I might have the baseness to abandon that poor old man whose life I am; but, my friend, those other feeble creatures there before us, Madeleine and Jacques, would remain with their father. Do you think, I ask you do you think they would be alive in three months under the insane dominion of that man? If my failure of duty concerned only myself--” A noble smile crossed her face. “But shall I kill my children! My God!” she exclaimed. “Why speak of these things? Marry, and let me die!”

She said the words in a tone so bitter, so hollow, that they stifled the remonstrances of my passion.

“You uttered cries that day beneath the walnut-tree; I have uttered my cries here beneath these alders, that is all,” I said; “I will be silent henceforth.”

“Your generosity shames me,” she said, raising her eyes to heaven.

We reached the terrace and found the count sitting in a chair, in the sun. The sight of that sunken face, scarcely brightened by a feeble smile, extinguished the last flames that came from the ashes. I leaned against the balustrade and considered the picture of that poor wreck, between his sickly children and his wife, pale with her vigils, worn out by extreme fatigue, by the fears, perhaps also by the joys of these terrible months, but whose cheeks now glowed from the emotions she had just passed through. At the sight of that suffering family beneath the trembling leafage through which the gray light of a cloudy autumn sky came dimly, I felt within me a rupture of the bonds which hold the body to the spirit. There came upon me then that moral spleen which, they say, the strongest wrestlers know in the crisis of their combats, a species of cold madness which makes a coward of the bravest man, a bigot of an unbeliever, and renders those it grasps indifferent to all things, even to vital sentiments, to honor, to love--for the doubt it brings takes from us the knowledge of ourselves and disgusts us with life itself. Poor, nervous creatures, whom the very richness of your organization delivers over to this mysterious, fatal power, who are your peers and who your judges? Horrified by the thoughts that rose within me, and demanding, like the wicked man, “Where is now thy God?” I could not restrain the tears that rolled down my cheeks.

“What is it, dear Felix?” said Madeleine in her childish voice.

Then Henriette put to flight these dark horrors of the mind by a look of tender solicitude which shone into my soul like a sunbeam. Just then the old huntsman brought me a letter from Tours, at sight of which I made a sudden cry of surprise, which made Madame de Mortsauf tremble. I saw the king’s signet and knew it contained my recall. I gave her the letter and she read it at a glance.

“What will become of me?” she murmured, beholding her desert sunless.

We fell into a stupor of thought which oppressed us equally; never had we felt more strongly how necessary we were to one another. The countess, even when she spoke indifferently of other things, seemed to have a new voice, as if the instrument had lost some chords and others were out of tune. Her movements were apathetic, her eyes without light. I begged her to tell me her thoughts.

“Have I any?” she replied in a dazed way.

She drew me into her chamber, made me sit upon the sofa, took a package from the drawer of her dressing-table, and knelt before me, saying: “This hair has fallen from my head during the last year; take it, it is yours; you will some day know how and why.”

Slowly I bent to meet her brow, and she did not avoid my lips. I kissed her sacredly, without unworthy passion, without one impure impulse, but solemnly, with tenderness. Was she willing to make the sacrifice; or did she merely come, as I did once, to the verge of the precipice? If love were leading her to give herself could she have worn that calm, that holy look; would she have asked, in that pure voice of hers, “You are not angry with me, are you?”

I left that evening; she wished to accompany me on the road to Frapesle; and we stopped under my walnut-tree. I showed it to her, and told her how I had first seen her four years earlier from that spot. “The valley was so beautiful then!” I cried.

“And now?” she said quickly.

“You are beneath my tree, and the valley is ours!”

She bowed her head and that was our farewell; she got into her carriage with Madeleine, and I into mine alone.

On my return to Paris I was absorbed in pressing business which took all my time and kept me out of society, which for a while forgot me. I corresponded with Madame de Mortsauf, and sent her my journal once a week. She answered twice a month. It was a life of solitude yet teeming, like those sequestered spots, blooming unknown, which I had sometimes found in the depths of woods when gathering the flowers for my poems.

Oh, you who love! take these obligations on you; accept these daily duties, like those the Church imposes upon Christians. The rigorous observances of the Roman faith contain a great idea; they plough the furrow of duty in the soul by the daily repetition of acts which keep alive the sense of hope and fear. Sentiments flow clearer in furrowed channels which purify their stream; they refresh the heart, they fertilize the life from the abundant treasures of a hidden faith, the source divine in which the single thought of a single love is multiplied indefinitely.

My love, an echo of the Middle Ages and of chivalry, was known, I know not how; possibly the king and the Duc de Lenoncourt had spoken of it. From that upper sphere the romantic yet simple story of a young man piously adoring a beautiful woman remote from the world, noble in her solitude, faithful without support to duty, spread, no doubt quickly, through the faubourg St. Germain. In the salons I was the object of embarrassing notice; for retired life has advantages which if once experienced make the burden of a constant social intercourse insupportable. Certain minds are painfully affected by violent contrasts, just as eyes accustomed to soft colors are hurt by glaring light. This was my condition then; you may be surprised at it now, but have patience; the inconsistencies of the Vandenesse of to-day will be explained to you.

I found society courteous and women most kind. After the marriage of the Duc de Berry the court resumed its former splendor and the glory of the French fetes revived. The Allied occupation was over, prosperity reappeared, enjoyments were again possible. Noted personages, illustrious by rank, prominent by fortune, came from all parts of Europe to the capital of the intellect, where the merits and the vices of other countries were found magnified and whetted by the charms of French intellect.

Five months after leaving Clochegourde my good angel wrote me, in the middle of the winter, a despairing letter, telling me of the serious illness of her son. He was then out of danger, but there were many fears for the future; the doctor said that precautions were necessary for his lungs--the suggestion of a terrible idea which had put the mother’s heart in mourning. Hardly had Jacques begun to convalesce, and she could breathe again, when Madeleine made them all uneasy. That pretty plant, whose bloom had lately rewarded the mother’s culture, was now frail and pallid and anemic. The countess, worn-out by Jacques’ long illness, found no courage, she said, to bear this additional blow, and the ever present spectacle of these two dear failing creatures made her insensible to the redoubled torment of her husband’s temper. Thus the storms were again raging; tearing up by the roots the hopes that were planted deepest in her bosom. She was now at the mercy of the count; weary of the struggle, she allowed him to regain all the ground he had lost.

“When all my strength is employed in caring for my children,” she wrote, “how is it possible to employ it against Monsieur de Mortsauf; how can I struggle against his aggressions when I am fighting against death? Standing here to-day, alone and much enfeebled, between these two young images of mournful fate, I am overpowered with disgust, invincible disgust for life. What blow can I feel, to what affection can I answer, when I see Jacques motionless on the terrace, scarcely a sign of life about him, except in those dear eyes, large by emaciation, hollow as those of an old man and, oh, fatal sign, full of precocious intelligence contrasting with his physical debility. When I look at my pretty Madeleine, once so gay, so caressing, so blooming, now white as death, her very hair and eyes seem to me to have paled; she turns a languishing look upon me as if bidding me farewell; nothing rouses her, nothing tempts her. In spite of all my efforts I cannot amuse my children; they smile at me, but their smile is only in answer to my endearments, it does not come from them. They weep because they have no strength to play with me. Suffering has enfeebled their whole being, it has loosened even the ties that bound them to me.

“Thus you can well believe that Clochegourde is very sad. Monsieur de Mortsauf now rules everything--Oh my friend! you, my glory!” she wrote, farther on, “you must indeed love me well to love me still; to love me callous, ungrateful, turned to stone by grief.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
CHAPTER III. THE TWO WOMEN

It was at this time, when I was never more deeply moved in my whole
being, when I lived in that soul to which I strove to send the luminous
breeze of the mornings and the hope of the crimsoned evenings, that
I met, in the salons of the Elysee-Bourbon, one of those illustrious
ladies who reign as sovereigns in society. Immensely rich, born of a
family whose blood was pure from all misalliance since the Conquest,
married to one of the most distinguished old men of the British peerage,
it was nevertheless evident that these advantages were mere accessories
heightening this lady’s beauty, graces, manners, and wit, all of which
had a brilliant quality that dazzled before it charmed. She was the
idol of the day; reigning the more securely over Parisian society
because she possessed the quality most necessary to success,—the hand
of iron in the velvet glove spoken of by Bernadotte.

You know the singular characteristics of English people, the distance
and coldness of their own Channel which they put between them and
whoever has not been presented to them in a proper manner. Humanity
seems to be an ant-hill on which they tread; they know none of their
species except the few they admit into their circle; they ignore even
the language of the rest; tongues may move and eyes may see in their
presence but neither sound nor look has reached them; to them, the
people are as if they were not. The British present an image of their
own island, where law rules everything, where all is automatic in
every station of life, where the exercise of virtue appears to be the
necessary working of a machine which goes by clockwork. Fortifications
of polished steel rise around the Englishwoman behind the golden wires
of her household cage (where the feed-box and the drinking-cup, the
perches and the food are exquisite in quality), but they make her
irresistibly attractive. No people ever trained married women so
carefully to hypocrisy by holding them rigidly between the two extremes
of death or social station; for them there is no middle path between
shame and honor; either the wrong is completed or it does not exist;
it is all or nothing,—Hamlet’s “To be or not to be.” This alternative,
coupled with the scorn to which the customs of her country have trained
her, make an Englishwoman a being apart in the world. She is a helpless
creature, forced to be virtuous yet ready to yield, condemned to live
a lie in her heart, yet delightful in outward appearance—for these
English rest everything on appearances. Hence the special charms of
their women: the enthusiasm for a love which is all their life; the
minuteness of their care for their persons; the delicacy of their
passion, so charmingly rendered in the famous scene of Romeo and
Juliet in which, with one stroke, Shakespeare’s genius depicted his
country-women.

You, who envy them so many things, what can I tell you that you do not
know of these white sirens, impenetrable apparently but easily fathomed,
who believe that love suffices love, and turn enjoyments to satiety
by never varying them; whose soul has one note only, their voice one
syllable—an ocean of love in themselves, it is true, and he who has
never swum there misses part of the poetry of the senses, as he who has
never seen the sea has lost some strings of his lyre. You know the
why and wherefore of these words. My relations with the Marchioness
of Dudley had a disastrous celebrity. At an age when the senses have
dominion over our conduct, and when in my case they had been violently
repressed by circumstances, the image of the saint bearing her slow
martyrdom at Clochegourde shone so vividly before my mind that I was
able to resist all seductions. It was the lustre of this fidelity which
attracted Lady Dudley’s attention. My resistance stimulated her passion.
What she chiefly desired, like many Englishwomen, was the spice of
singularity; she wanted pepper, capsicum, with her heart’s food, just
as Englishmen need condiments to excite their appetite. The dull languor
forced into the lives of these women by the constant perfection of
everything about them, the methodical regularity of their habits, leads
them to adore the romantic and to welcome difficulty. I was wholly
unable to judge of such a character. The more I retreated to a cold
distance the more impassioned Lady Dudley became. The struggle, in
which she gloried, excited the curiosity of several persons, and this in
itself was a form of happiness which to her mind made ultimate triumph
obligatory. Ah! I might have been saved if some good friend had
then repeated to me her cruel comment on my relations with Madame de
Mortsauf.

“I am wearied to death,” she said, “of these turtle-dove sighings.”

Without seeking to justify my crime, I ask you to observe, Natalie, that
a man has fewer means of resisting a woman than she has of escaping him.
Our code of manners forbids the brutality of repressing a woman, whereas
repression with your sex is not only allurement to ours, but is imposed
upon you by conventions. With us, on the contrary, some unwritten law
of masculine self-conceit ridicules a man’s modesty; we leave you the
monopoly of that virtue, that you may have the privilege of granting us
favors; but reverse the case, and man succumbs before sarcasm.

Though protected by my love, I was not of an age to be wholly insensible
to the triple seductions of pride, devotion, and beauty. When Arabella
laid at my feet the homage of a ball-room where she reigned a queen,
when she watched by glance to know if my taste approved of her dress,
and when she trembled with pleasure on seeing that she pleased me, I was
affected by her emotion. Besides, she occupied a social position where
I could not escape her; I could not refuse invitations in the diplomatic
circle; her rank admitted her everywhere, and with the cleverness all
women display to obtain what pleases them, she often contrived that
the mistress of the house should place me beside her at dinner. On such
occasions she spoke in low tones to my ear. “If I were loved like Madame
de Mortsauf,” she said once, “I should sacrifice all.” She did submit
herself with a laugh in many humble ways; she promised me a discretion
equal to any test, and even asked that I would merely suffer her to
love me. “Your friend always, your mistress when you will,” she said. At
last, after an evening when she had made herself so beautiful that she
was certain to have excited my desires, she came to me. The scandal
resounded through England, where the aristocracy was horrified like
heaven itself at the fall of its highest angel. Lady Dudley abandoned
her place in the British empyrean, gave up her wealth, and endeavored to
eclipse by her sacrifices her whose virtue had been the cause of this
great disaster. She took delight, like the devil on the pinnacle of the
temple, in showing me all the riches of her passionate kingdom.

Read me, I pray you, with indulgence. The matter concerns one of the
most interesting problems of human life,—a crisis to which most men
are subjected, and which I desire to explain, if only to place a warning
light upon the reef. This beautiful woman, so slender, so fragile, this
milk-white creature, so yielding, so submissive, so gentle, her brow so
endearing, the hair that crowns it so fair and fine, this tender woman,
whose brilliancy is phosphorescent and fugitive, has, in truth, an
iron nature. No horse, no matter how fiery he may be, can conquer her
vigorous wrist, or strive against that hand so soft in appearance, but
never tired. She has the foot of a doe, a thin, muscular little foot,
indescribably graceful in outline. She is so strong that she fears
no struggle; men cannot follow her on horseback; she would win a
steeple-chase against a centaur; she can bring down a stag without
stopping her horse. Her body never perspires; it inhales the fire of the
atmosphere, and lives in water under pain of not living at all. Her
love is African; her desires are like the whirlwinds of the desert—the
desert, whose torrid expanse is in her eyes, the azure, love-laden
desert, with its changeless skies, its cool and starry nights. What a
contrast to Clochegourde! the east and the west! the one drawing into
her every drop of moisture for her own nourishment, the other exuding
her soul, wrapping her dear ones in her luminous atmosphere; the one
quick and slender; the other slow and massive.

Have you ever reflected on the actual meaning of the manners and
customs and morals of England? Is it not the deification of matter? a
well-defined, carefully considered Epicureanism, judiciously applied?
No matter what may be said against the statement, England is
materialist,—possibly she does not know it herself. She lays claim to
religion and morality, from which, however, divine spirituality, the
catholic soul, is absent; and its fructifying grace cannot be replaced
by any counterfeit, however well presented it may be. England possesses
in the highest degree that science of existence which turns to account
every particle of materiality; the science that makes her women’s
slippers the most exquisite slippers in the world, gives to their
linen ineffable fragrance, lines their drawers with cedar, serves tea
carefully drawn, at a certain hour, banishes dust, nails the carpets
to the floors in every corner of the house, brushes the cellar walls,
polishes the knocker of the front door, oils the springs of the
carriage,—in short, makes matter a nutritive and downy pulp, clean and
shining, in the midst of which the soul expires of enjoyment and the
frightful monotony of comfort in a life without contrasts, deprived of
spontaneity, and which, to sum all in one word, makes a machine of you.

Thus I suddenly came to know, in the bosom of this British luxury, a
woman who is perhaps unique among her sex; who caught me in the nets of
a love excited by my indifference, and to the warmth of which I opposed
a stern continence,—one of those loves possessed of overwhelming charm,
an electricity of their own, which lead us to the skies through the
ivory gates of slumber, or bear us thither on their powerful pinions.
A love monstrously ungrateful, which laughs at the bodies of those it
kills; love without memory, a cruel love, resembling the policy of the
English nation; a love to which, alas, most men yield. You understand
the problem? Man is composed of matter and spirit; animality comes to
its end in him, and the angel begins in him. There lies the struggle we
all pass through, between the future destiny of which we are conscious
and the influence of anterior instincts from which we are not wholly
detached,—carnal love and divine love. One man combines them, another
abstains altogether; some there are who seek the satisfaction of their
anterior appetites from the whole sex; others idealize their love in one
woman who is to them the universe; some float irresolutely between the
delights of matter and the joys of soul, others spiritualize the body,
requiring of it that which it cannot give.

If, thinking over these leading characteristics of love, you take into
account the dislikes and the affinities which result from the diversity
of organisms, and which sooner or later break all ties between those who
have not fully tried each other; if you add to this the mistakes arising
from the hopes of those who live more particularly either by their
minds, or by their hearts, or by action, who either think, or feel, or
act, and whose tendency is misunderstood in the close association in
which two persons, equal counterparts, find themselves, you will have
great indulgence for sorrows to which the world is pitiless. Well, Lady
Dudley gratified the instincts, organs, appetites, the vices and virtues
of the subtile matter of which we are made; she was the mistress of the
body; Madame de Mortsauf was the wife of the soul. The love which
the mistress satisfies has its limits; matter is finite, its inherent
qualities have an ascertained force, it is capable of saturation; often
I felt a void even in Paris, near Lady Dudley. Infinitude is the region
of the heart, love had no limits at Clochegourde. I loved Lady Dudley
passionately; and certainly, though the animal in her was magnificent,
she was also superior in mind; her sparkling and satirical conversation
had a wide range. But I adored Henriette. At night I wept with
happiness, in the morning with remorse.

Some women have the art to hide their jealousy under a tone of angelic
kindness; they are, like Lady Dudley, over thirty years of age. Such
women know how to feel and how to calculate; they press out the juices
of to-day and think of the future also; they can stifle a moan, often a
natural one, with the will of a huntsman who pays no heed to a wound
in the ardor of the chase. Without ever speaking of Madame de Mortsauf,
Arabella endeavored to kill her in my soul, where she ever found her,
her own passion increasing with the consciousness of that invincible
love. Intending to triumph by comparisons which would turn to her
advantage, she was never suspicious, or complaining, or inquisitive, as
are most young women; but, like a lioness who has seized her prey
and carries it to her lair to devour, she watched that nothing should
disturb her feast, and guarded me like a rebellious captive. I wrote to
Henriette under her very eyes, but she never read a line of my letters;
she never sought in any way to know to whom they were addressed. I had
my liberty; she seemed to say to herself, “If I lose him it shall be my
own fault,” and she proudly relied on a love that would have given me
her life had I asked for it,—in fact she often told me that if I left
her she would kill herself. I have heard her praise the custom of Indian
widows who burn themselves upon their husband’s grave. “In India that is
a distinction reserved for the higher classes,” she said, “and is very
little understood by Europeans, who are incapable of understanding the
grandeur of the privilege; you must admit, however, that on the dead
level of our modern customs aristocracy can rise to greatness only
through unparalleled devotions. How can I prove to the middle classes
that the blood in my veins is not the same as theirs, unless I show them
that I can die as they cannot? Women of no birth can have diamonds and
satins and horses—even coats-of-arms, which ought to be sacred to us,
for any one can buy a name. But to love, with our heads up, in defiance
of law; to die for the idol we have chosen, with the sheets of our bed
for a shroud; to lay earth and heaven at his feet, robbing the Almighty
of his right to make a god, and never to betray that man, never, never,
even for virtue’s sake,—for, to refuse him anything in the name of
duty is to devote ourselves to something that is not he, and let that
something be a man or an idea, it is betrayal all the same,—these
are heights to which common women cannot attain; they know but two
matter-of-fact ways; the great high-road of virtue, or the muddy path of
the courtesan.”

Pride, you see, was her instrument; she flattered all vanities by
deifying them. She put me so high that she might live at my feet;
in fact, the seductions of her spirit were literally expressed by an
attitude of subserviency and her complete submission. In what words
shall I describe those first six months when I was lost in enervating
enjoyments, in the meshes of a love fertile in pleasures and knowing how
to vary them with a cleverness learned by long experience, yet hiding
that knowledge beneath the transports of passion. These pleasures, the
sudden revelation of the poetry of the senses, constitute the powerful
tie which binds young men to women older than they. It is the chain of
the galley-slave; it leaves an ineffaceable brand upon the soul, filling
it with disgust for pure and innocent love decked with flowers only,
which serves no alcohol in curiously chased cups inlaid with jewels and
sparkling with unquenchable fires.

Recalling my early dreams of pleasures I knew nothing of, expressed at
Clochegourde in my “selams,” the voice of my flowers, pleasures which
the union of souls renders all the more ardent, I found many sophistries
by which I excused to myself the delight with which I drained that
jewelled cup. Often, when, lost in infinite lassitude, my soul
disengaged itself from the body and floated far from earth, I thought
that these pleasures might be the means of abolishing matter and of
rendering to the spirit its power to soar. Sometimes Lady Dudley, like
other women, profited by the exaltation in which I was to bind me by
promises; under the lash of a desire she wrung blasphemies from my lips
against the angel at Clochegourde. Once a traitor I became a scoundrel.
I continued to write to Madame de Mortsauf, in the tone of the lad she
had first known in his strange blue coat; but, I admit it, her gift of
second-sight terrified me when I thought what ruin the indiscretion of a
word might bring to the dear castle of my hopes. Often, in the midst
of my pleasure a sudden horror seized me; I heard the name of Henriette
uttered by a voice above me, like that in the Scriptures, demanding:
“Cain, where is thy brother Abel?”

At last my letters remained unanswered. I was seized with horrible
anxiety and wished to leave for Clochegourde. Arabella did not oppose
it, but she talked of accompanying me to Touraine. Her woman’s wit told
her that the journey might be a means of finally detaching me from her
rival; while I, blind with fear and guilelessly unsuspicious, did not
see the trap she set for me. Lady Dudley herself proposed the humblest
concessions. She would stay near Tours, at a little country-place,
alone, disguised; she would refrain from going out in the day-time, and
only meet me in the evening when people were not likely to be about.
I left Tours on horseback. I had my reasons for this; my evening
excursions to meet her would require a horse, and mine was an Arab which
Lady Hester Stanhope had sent to the marchioness, and which she had
lately exchanged with me for that famous picture of Rembrandt which I
obtained in so singular a way, and which now hangs in her drawing-room
in London. I took the road I had traversed on foot six years earlier and
stopped beneath my walnut-tree. From there I saw Madame de Mortsauf in
a white dress standing at the edge of the terrace. Instantly I rode
towards her with the speed of lightning, in a straight line and across
country. She heard the stride of the swallow of the desert and when I
pulled him up suddenly at the terrace, she said to me: “Oh, you here!”

Those three words blasted me. She knew my treachery. Who had told her?
her mother, whose hateful letter she afterwards showed me. The feeble,
indifferent voice, once so full of life, the dull pallor of its tones
revealed a settled grief, exhaling the breath of flowers cut and left
to wither. The tempest of infidelity, like those freshets of the Loire
which bury the meadows for all time in sand, had torn its way through
her soul, leaving a desert where once the verdure clothed the fields.
I led my horse through the little gate; he lay down on the grass at my
command and the countess, who came forward slowly, exclaimed, “What a
fine animal!” She stood with folded arms lest I should try to take her
hand; I guessed her meaning.

“I will let Monsieur de Mortsauf know you are here,” she said, leaving
me.

I stood still, confounded, letting her go, watching her, always noble,
slow, and proud,—whiter than I had ever seen her; on her brow the
yellow imprint of bitterest melancholy, her head bent like a lily heavy
with rain.

“Henriette!” I cried in the agony of a man about to die.

She did not turn or pause; she disdained to say that she withdrew from
me that name, but she did not answer to it and continued on. I may feel
paltry and small in this dreadful vale of life where myriads of human
beings now dust make the surface of the globe, small indeed among that
crowd, hurrying beneath the luminous spaces which light them; but what
sense of humiliation could equal that with which I watched her calm
white figure inflexibly mounting with even steps the terraces of her
chateau of Clochegourde, the pride and the torture of that Christian
Dido? I cursed Arabella in a single imprecation which might have killed
her had she heard it, she who had left all for me as some leave all for
God. I remained lost in a world of thought, conscious of utter misery
on all sides. Presently I saw the whole family coming down; Jacques,
running with the eagerness of his age. Madeleine, a gazelle with
mournful eyes, walked with her mother. Monsieur de Mortsauf came to me
with open arms, pressed me to him and kissed me on both cheeks crying
out, “Felix, I know now that I owed you my life.”

Madame de Mortsauf stood with her back towards me during this little
scene, under pretext of showing the horse to Madeleine.

“Ha, the devil! that’s what women are,” cried the count; “admiring your
horse!”

Madeleine turned, came up to me, and I kissed her hand, looking at the
countess, who colored.

“Madeleine seems much better,” I said.

“Poor little girl!” said the countess, kissing her on her forehead.

“Yes, for the time being they are all well,” answered the count. “Except
me, Felix; I am as battered as an old tower about to fall.”

“The general is still depressed,” I remarked to Madame de Mortsauf.

“We all have our blue devils—is not that the English term?” she
replied.

The whole party walked on towards the vineyard with the feeling that
some serious event had happened. She had no wish to be alone with me.
Still, I was her guest.

“But about your horse? why isn’t he attended to?” said the count.

“You see I am wrong if I think of him, and wrong if I do not,” remarked
the countess.

“Well, yes,” said her husband; “there is a time to do things, and a time
not to do them.”

“I will attend to him,” I said, finding this sort of greeting
intolerable. “No one but myself can put him into his stall; my groom is
coming by the coach from Chinon; he will rub him down.”

“I suppose your groom is from England,” she said.

“That is where they all come from,” remarked the count, who grew
cheerful in proportion as his wife seemed depressed. Her coldness
gave him an opportunity to oppose her, and he overwhelmed me with
friendliness.

“My dear Felix,” he said, taking my hand, and pressing it
affectionately, “pray forgive Madame de Mortsauf; women are so
whimsical. But it is owing to their weakness; they cannot have the
evenness of temper we owe to our strength of character. She really loves
you, I know it; only—”

While the count was speaking Madame de Mortsauf gradually moved away
from us so as to leave us alone.

“Felix,” said the count, in a low voice, looking at his wife, who was
now going up to the house with her two children, “I don’t know what is
going on in Madame de Mortsauf’s mind, but for the last six weeks her
disposition has completely changed. She, so gentle, so devoted hitherto,
is now extraordinarily peevish.”

Manette told me later that the countess had fallen into a state of
depression which made her indifferent to the count’s provocations. No
longer finding a soft substance in which he could plant his arrows, the
man became as uneasy as a child when the poor insect it is tormenting
ceases to move. He now needed a confidant, as the hangman needs a
helper.

“Try to question Madame de Mortsauf,” he said after a pause, “and find
out what is the matter. A woman always has secrets from her husband;
but perhaps she will tell you what troubles her. I would sacrifice
everything to make her happy, even to half my remaining days or half my
fortune. She is necessary to my very life. If I have not that angel at
my side as I grow old I shall be the most wretched of men. I do desire
to die easy. Tell her I shall not be here long to trouble her. Yes,
Felix, my poor friend, I am going fast, I know it. I hide the fatal
truth from every one; why should I worry them beforehand? The trouble is
in the orifice of the stomach, my friend. I have at last discovered the
true cause of this disease; it is my sensibility that is killing me.
Indeed, all our feelings affect the gastric centre.”

“Then do you mean,” I said, smiling, “that the best-hearted people die
of their stomachs?”

“Don’t laugh, Felix; nothing is more absolutely true. Too keen
a sensibility increases the play of the sympathetic nerve; these
excitements of feeling keep the mucous membrane of the stomach in a
state of constant irritation. If this state continues it deranges, at
first insensibly, the digestive functions; the secretions change, the
appetite is impaired, and the digestion becomes capricious; sharp
pains are felt; they grow worse day by day, and more frequent; then
the disorder comes to a crisis, as if a slow poison were passing the
alimentary canal; the mucous membrane thickens, the valve of the pylorus
becomes indurated and forms a scirrhus, of which the patient dies. Well,
I have reached that point, my dear friend. The induration is proceeding
and nothing checks it. Just look at my yellow skin, my feverish eyes,
my excessive thinness. I am withering away. But what is to be done?
I brought the seeds of the disease home with me from the emigration;
heaven knows what I suffered then! My marriage, which might have
repaired the wrong, far from soothing my ulcerated mind increased the
wound. What did I find? ceaseless fears for the children, domestic jars,
a fortune to remake, economies which required great privations, which
I was obliged to impose upon my wife, but which I was the one to suffer
from; and then,—I can tell this to none but you, Felix,—I have a worse
trouble yet. Though Blanche is an angel, she does not understand me; she
knows nothing of my sufferings and she aggravates them; but I forgive
her. It is a dreadful thing to say, my friend, but a less virtuous woman
might have made me more happy by lending herself to consolations which
Blanche never thinks of, for she is as silly as a child. Moreover my
servants torment me; blockheads who take my French for Greek! When our
fortune was finally remade inch by inch, and I had some relief from
care, it was too late, the harm was done; I had reached the period when
the appetite is vitiated. Then came my severe illness, so ill-managed by
Origet. In short, I have not six months to live.”

I listened to the count in terror. On meeting the countess I had been
struck with her yellow skin and the feverish brilliancy of her eyes.
I led the count towards the house while seeming to listen to his
complaints and his medical dissertations; but my thoughts were all with
Henriette, and I wanted to observe her. We found her in the salon, where
she was listening to a lesson in mathematics which the Abbe Dominis
was giving Jacques, and at the same time showing Madeleine a stitch of
embroidery. Formerly she would have laid aside every occupation the day
of my arrival to be with me. But my love was so deeply real that I drove
back into my heart the grief I felt at this contrast between the past
and the present, and thought only of the fatal yellow tint on that
celestial face, which resembled the halo of divine light Italian
painters put around the faces of their saints. I felt the icy wind of
death pass over me. Then when the fire of her eyes, no longer softened
by the liquid light in which in former times they moved, fell upon me,
I shuddered; I noticed several changes, caused by grief, which I had not
seen in the open air. The slender lines which, at my last visit, were
so lightly marked upon her forehead had deepened; her temples with their
violet veins seemed burning and concave; her eyes were sunk beneath the
brows, their circles browned;—alas! she was discolored like a fruit
when decay is beginning to show upon the surface, or a worm is at the
core. I, whose whole ambition had been to pour happiness into her soul,
I it was who embittered the spring from which she had hoped to refresh
her life and renew her courage. I took a seat beside her and said in a
voice filled with tears of repentance, “Are you satisfied with your own
health?”

“Yes,” she answered, plunging her eyes into mine. “My health is there,”
 she added, motioning to Jacques and Madeleine.

The latter, just fifteen, had come victoriously out of her struggle with
anaemia, and was now a woman. She had grown tall; the Bengal roses were
blooming in her once sallow cheeks. She had lost the unconcern of a
child who looks every one in the face, and now dropped her eyes; her
movements were slow and infrequent, like those of her mother; her figure
was slim, but the gracefulness of the bust was already developing;
already an instinct of coquetry had smoothed the magnificent black hair
which lay in bands upon her Spanish brow. She was like those pretty
statuettes of the Middle Ages, so delicate in outline, so slender in
form that the eye as it seizes their charm fears to break them. Health,
the fruit of untold efforts, had made her cheeks as velvety as a peach
and given to her throat the silken down which, like her mother’s,
caught the light. She was to live! God had written it, dear bud of the
loveliest of human flowers, on the long lashes of her eyelids, on the
curve of those shoulders which gave promise of a development as superb
as her mother’s! This brown young girl, erect as a poplar, contrasted
with Jacques, a fragile youth of seventeen, whose head had grown
immensely, causing anxiety by the rapid expansion of the forehead, while
his feverish, weary eyes were in keeping with a voice that was deep and
sonorous. The voice gave forth too strong a volume of tone, the eye too
many thoughts. It was Henriette’s intellect and soul and heart that were
here devouring with swift flames a body without stamina; for Jacques
had the milk-white skin and high color which characterize young English
women doomed sooner or later to the consumptive curse,—an appearance of
health that deceives the eye. Following a sign by which Henriette,
after showing me Madeleine, made me look at Jacques drawing geometrical
figures and algebraic calculations on a board before the Abbe Dominis,
I shivered at the sight of death hidden beneath the roses, and was
thankful for the self-deception of his mother.

“When I see my children thus, happiness stills my griefs—just as
those griefs are dumb, and even disappear, when I see them failing. My
friend,” she said, her eyes shining with maternal pleasure, “if other
affections fail us, the feelings rewarded here, the duties done and
crowned with success, are compensation enough for defeat elsewhere.
Jacques will be, like you, a man of the highest education, possessed of
the worthiest knowledge; he will be, like you, an honor to his country,
which he may assist in governing, helped by you, whose standing will be
so high; but I will strive to make him faithful to his first affections.
Madeleine, dear creature, has a noble heart; she is pure as the snows
on the highest Alps; she will have a woman’s devotion and a woman’s
graceful intellect. She is proud; she is worthy of being a Lenoncourt.
My motherhood, once so tried, so tortured, is happy now, happy with an
infinite happiness, unmixed with pain. Yes, my life is full, my life
is rich. You see, God makes my joy to blossom in the heart of these
sanctified affections, and turns to bitterness those that might have led
me astray—”

“Good!” cried the abbe, joyfully. “Monsieur le vicomte begins to know as
much as I—”

Just then Jacques coughed.

“Enough for to-day, my dear abbe,” said the countess, “above all, no
chemistry. Go for a ride on horseback, Jacques,” she added, letting her
son kiss her with the tender and yet dignified pleasure of a mother.
“Go, dear, but take care of yourself.”

“But,” I said, as her eyes followed Jacques with a lingering look, “you
have not answered me. Do you feel ill?”

“Oh, sometimes, in my stomach. If I were in Paris I should have the
honors of gastritis, the fashionable disease.”

“My mother suffers very much and very often,” said Madeleine.

“Ah!” she said, “does my health interest you?”

Madeleine, astonished at the irony of these words, looked from one to
the other; my eyes counted the roses on the cushion of the gray and
green sofa which was in the salon.

“This situation is intolerable,” I whispered in her ear.

“Did I create it?” she asked. “Dear child,” she said aloud, with one of
those cruel levities by which women point their vengeance, “don’t
you read history? France and England are enemies, and ever have been.
Madeleine knows that; she knows that a broad sea, and a cold and stormy
one, separates them.”

The vases on the mantelshelf had given place to candelabra, no doubt to
deprive me of the pleasure of filling them with flowers; I found them
later in my own room. When my servant arrived I went out to give him
some orders; he had brought me certain things I wished to place in my
room.

“Felix,” said the countess, “do not make a mistake. My aunt’s old room
is now Madeleine’s. Yours is over the count’s.”

Though guilty, I had a heart; those words were dagger thrusts coldly
given at its tenderest spot, for which she seemed to aim. Moral
sufferings are not fixed quantities; they depend on the sensitiveness of
souls. The countess had trod each round of the ladder of pain; but, for
that very reason, the kindest of women was now as cruel as she was once
beneficent. I looked at Henriette, but she averted her head. I went to
my new room, which was pretty, white and green. Once there I burst into
tears. Henriette heard me as she entered with a bunch of flowers in her
hand.

“Henriette,” I said, “will you never forgive a wrong that is indeed
excusable?”

“Do not call me Henriette,” she said. “She no longer exists, poor soul;
but you may feel sure of Madame de Mortsauf, a devoted friend, who will
listen to you and who will love you. Felix, we will talk of these things
later. If you have still any tenderness for me let me grow accustomed
to seeing you. Whenever words will not rend my heart, if the day should
ever come when I recover courage, I will speak to you, but not till
then. Look at the valley,” she said, pointing to the Indre, “it hurts
me, I love it still.”

“Ah, perish England and all her women! I will send my resignation to the
king; I will live and die here, pardoned.”

“No, love her; love that woman! Henriette is not. This is no play, and
you should know it.”

She left the room, betraying by the tone of her last words the extent of
her wounds. I ran after her and held her back, saying, “Do you no longer
love me?”

“You have done me more harm than all my other troubles put together.
To-day I suffer less, therefore I love you less. Be kind; do not
increase my pain; if you suffer, remember that—I—live.”

She withdrew her hand, which I held, cold, motionless, but moist, in
mine, and darted like an arrow through the corridor in which this scene
of actual tragedy took place.

At dinner, the count subjected me to a torture I had little expected.
“So the Marchioness of Dudley is not in Paris?” he said.

I blushed excessively, but answered, “No.”

“She is not in Tours,” continued the count.

“She is not divorced, and she can go back to England. Her husband would
be very glad if she would return to him,” I said, eagerly.

“Has she children?” asked Madame de Mortsauf, in a changed voice.

“Two sons,” I replied.

“Where are they?”

“In England, with their father.”

“Come, Felix,” interposed the count; “be frank; is she as handsome as
they say?”

“How can you ask him such a question?” cried the countess. “Is not the
woman you love always the handsomest of women?”

“Yes, always,” I said, firmly, with a glance which she could not
sustain.

“You are a happy fellow,” said the count; “yes, a very happy one. Ha! in
my young days, I should have gone mad over such a conquest—”

“Hush!” said Madame de Mortsauf, reminding the count of Madeleine by a
look.

“I am not a child,” he said.

When we left the table I followed the countess to the terrace. When
we were alone she exclaimed, “How is it possible that some women can
sacrifice their children to a man? Wealth, position, the world, I can
conceive of; eternity? yes, possibly; but children! deprive one’s self
of one’s children!”

“Yes, and such women would give even more if they had it; they sacrifice
everything.”

The world was suddenly reversed before her, her ideas became confused.
The grandeur of that thought struck her; a suspicion entered her mind
that sacrifice, immolation justified happiness; the echo of her own
inward cry for love came back to her; she stood dumb in presence of her
wasted life. Yes, for a moment horrible doubts possessed her; then she
rose, grand and saintly, her head erect.

“Love her well, Felix,” she said, with tears in her eyes; “she shall
be my happy sister. I will forgive her the harm she has done me if she
gives you what you could not have here. You are right; I have never told
you that I loved you, and I never have loved you as the world loves. But
if she is a mother how can she love you so?”

“Dear saint,” I answered, “I must be less moved than I am now, before I
can explain to you how it is that you soar victoriously above her. She
is a woman of earth, the daughter of decaying races; you are the child
of heaven, an angel worthy of worship; you have my heart, she my flesh
only. She knows this and it fills her with despair; she would change
parts with you even though the cruellest martyrdom were the price of the
change. But all is irremediable. To you the soul, to you the thoughts,
the love that is pure, to you youth and old age; to her the desires and
joys of passing passion; to you remembrance forever, to her oblivion—”

“Tell me, tell me that again, oh, my friend!” she turned to a bench and
sat down, bursting into tears. “If that be so, Felix, virtue, purity
of life, a mother’s love, are not mistakes. Oh, pour that balm upon
my wounds! Repeat the words which bear me back to heaven, where once
I longed to rise with you. Bless me by a look, by a sacred word,—I
forgive you for the sufferings you have caused me the last two months.”

“Henriette, there are mysteries in the life of men of which you know
nothing. I met you at an age when the feelings of the heart stifle the
desires implanted in our nature; but many scenes, the memory of which
will kindle my soul to the hour of death, must have told you that this
age was drawing to a close, and it was your constant triumph still to
prolong its mute delights. A love without possession is maintained
by the exasperation of desire; but there comes a moment when all is
suffering within us—for in this we have no resemblance to you. We
possess a power we cannot abdicate, or we cease to be men. Deprived
of the nourishment it needs, the heart feeds upon itself, feeling an
exhaustion which is not death, but which precedes it. Nature cannot long
be silenced; some trifling accident awakens it to a violence that seems
like madness. No, I have not loved, but I have thirsted in the desert.”

“The desert!” she said bitterly, pointing to the valley. “Ah!” she
exclaimed, “how he reasons! what subtle distinctions! Faithful hearts
are not so learned.”

“Henriette,” I said, “do not quarrel with me for a chance expression.
No, my soul has not vacillated, but I have not been master of my senses.
That woman is not ignorant that you are the only one I ever loved. She
plays a secondary part in my life; she knows it and is resigned. I have
the right to leave her as men leave courtesans.”

“And then?”

“She tells me that she will kill herself,” I answered, thinking that
this resolve would startle Henriette. But when she heard it a disdainful
smile, more expressive than the thoughts it conveyed, flickered on her
lips. “My dear conscience,” I continued, “if you would take into
account my resistance and the seductions that led to my fall you would
understand the fatal—”

“Yes, fatal!” she cried. “I believed in you too much. I believed you
capable of the virtue a priest practises. All is over,” she continued,
after a pause. “I owe you much, my friend; you have extinguished in me
the fires of earthly life. The worst of the way is over; age is coming
on. I am ailing now, soon I may be ill; I can never be the brilliant
fairy who showers you with favors. Be faithful to Lady Dudley.
Madeleine, whom I was training to be yours, ah! who will have her now?
Poor Madeleine, poor Madeleine!” she repeated, like the mournful burden
of a song. “I would you had heard her say to me when you came: ‘Mother,
you are not kind to Felix!’ Dear creature!”

She looked at me in the warm rays of the setting sun as they glided
through the foliage. Seized with compassion for the shipwreck of
our lives she turned back to memories of our pure past, yielding to
meditations which were mutual. We were silent, recalling past scenes;
our eyes went from the valley to the fields, from the windows of
Clochegourde to those of Frapesle, peopling the dream with my bouquets,
the fragrant language of our desires. It was her last hour of pleasure,
enjoyed with the purity of her Catholic soul. This scene, so grand to
each of us, cast its melancholy on both. She believed my words, and saw
where I placed her—in the skies.

“My friend,” she said, “I obey God, for his hand is in all this.”

I did not know until much later the deep meaning of her words. We slowly
returned up the terraces. She took my arm and leaned upon it resignedly,
bleeding still, but with a bandage on her wound.

“Human life is thus,” she said. “What had Monsieur de Mortsauf done to
deserve his fate? It proves the existence of a better world. Alas, for
those who walk in happier ways!”

She went on, estimating life so truly, considering its diverse aspects
so profoundly that these cold judgments revealed to me the disgust that
had come upon her for all things here below. When we reached the portico
she dropped my arm and said these last words: “If God has given us
the sentiment and the desire for happiness ought he not to take charge
himself of innocent souls who have found sorrow only in this low world?
Either that must be so, or God is not, and our life is no more than a
cruel jest.”

She entered and turned the house quickly; I found her on the sofa,
crouching, as though blasted by the voice which flung Saul to the
ground.

“What is the matter?” I asked.

“I no longer know what is virtue,” she replied; “I have no consciousness
of my own.”

We were silent, petrified, listening to the echo of those words which
fell like a stone cast into a gulf.

“If I am mistaken in my life she is right in hers,” Henriette said at
last.

Thus her last struggle followed her last happiness. When the count came
in she complained of illness, she who never complained. I conjured her
to tell me exactly where she suffered; but she refused to explain and
went to bed, leaving me a prey to unending remorse. Madeleine went with
her mother, and the next day I heard that the countess had been seized
with nausea, caused, she said, by the violent excitements of that day.
Thus I, who longed to give my life for hers, I was killing her.

“Dear count,” I said to Monsieur de Mortsauf, who obliged me to play
backgammon, “I think the countess very seriously ill. There is still
time to save her; pray send for Origet, and persuade her to follow his
advice.”

“Origet, who half killed me?” cried the count. “No, no; I’ll consult
Carbonneau.”

During this week, especially the first days of it, everything was
anguish to me—the beginning of paralysis of the heart—my vanity was
mortified, my soul rent. One must needs have been the centre of all
looks and aspirations, the mainspring of the life about him, the torch
from which all others drew their light, to understand the horror of the
void that was now about me. All things were there, the same, but the
spirit that gave life to them was extinct, like a blown-out flame. I now
understood the desperate desire of lovers never to see each other again
when love has flown. To be nothing where we were once so much! To find
the chilling silence of the grave where life so lately sparkled!
Such comparisons are overwhelming. I came at last to envy the dismal
ignorance of all happiness which had darkened my youth. My despair
became so great that the countess, I thought, felt pity for it. One day
after dinner as we were walking on the meadows beside the river I made
a last effort to obtain forgiveness. I told Jacques to go on with his
sister, and leaving the count to walk alone, I took Henriette to the
punt.

“Henriette,” I said; “one word of forgiveness, or I fling myself into
the Indre! I have sinned,—yes, it is true; but am I not like a dog in
his faithful attachments? I return like him, like him ashamed. If he
does wrong he is struck, but he loves the hand that strikes him; strike
me, bruise me, but give me back your heart.”

“Poor child,” she said, “are you not always my son?”

She took my arm and silently rejoined her children, with whom she
returned to Clochegourde, leaving me to the count, who began to talk
politics apropos of his neighbors.

“Let us go in,” I said; “you are bare-headed, and the dew may do you an
injury.”

“You pity me, my dear Felix,” he answered; “you understand me, but my
wife never tries to comfort me,—on principle, perhaps.”

Never would she have left me to walk home with her husband; it was now
I who had to find excuses to join her. I found her with her children,
explaining the rules of backgammon to Jacques.

“See there,” said the count, who was always jealous of the affection she
showed for her children; “it is for them that I am neglected. Husbands,
my dear Felix, are always suppressed. The most virtuous woman in the
world has ways of satisfying her desire to rob conjugal affection.”

She said nothing and continued as before.

“Jacques,” he said, “come here.”

Jacques objected slightly.

“Your father wants you; go at once, my son,” said his mother, pushing
him.

“They love me by order,” said the old man, who sometimes perceived his
situation.

“Monsieur,” she answered, passing her hand over Madeleine’s smooth
tresses, which were dressed that day “a la belle Ferronniere”; “do not
be unjust to us poor women; life is not so easy for us to bear. Perhaps
the children are the virtues of a mother.”

“My dear,” said the count, who took it into his head to be logical,
“what you say signifies that women who have no children would have no
virtue, and would leave their husbands in the lurch.”

The countess rose hastily and took Madeleine to the portico.

“That’s marriage, my dear fellow,” remarked the count to me. “Do you
mean to imply by going off in that manner that I am talking nonsense?”
 he cried to his wife, taking his son by the hand and going to the
portico after her with a furious look in his eyes.

“On the contrary, Monsieur, you frightened me. Your words hurt me
cruelly,” she added, in a hollow voice. “If virtue does not consist in
sacrificing everything to our children and our husband, what is virtue?”

“Sac-ri-ficing!” cried the count, making each syllable the blow of a
sledge-hammer on the heart of his victim. “What have you sacrificed to
your children? What do you sacrifice to me? Speak! what means all this?
Answer. What is going on here? What did you mean by what you said?”

“Monsieur,” she replied, “would you be satisfied to be loved for love of
God, or to know your wife virtuous for virtue’s sake?”

“Madame is right,” I said, interposing in a shaken voice which vibrated
in two hearts; “yes, the noblest privilege conferred by reason is to
attribute our virtues to the beings whose happiness is our work, and
whom we render happy, not from policy, nor from duty, but from an
inexhaustible and voluntary affection—”

A tear shone in Henriette’s eyes.

“And, dear count,” I continued, “if by chance a woman is involuntarily
subjected to feelings other than those society imposes on her, you must
admit that the more irresistible that feeling is, the more virtuous she
is in smothering it, in sacrificing herself to her husband and children.
This theory is not applicable to me who unfortunately show an example to
the contrary, nor to you whom it will never concern.”

“You have a noble soul, Felix,” said the count, slipping his arm, not
ungracefully, round his wife’s waist and drawing her towards him to
say: “Forgive a poor sick man, dear, who wants to be loved more than he
deserves.”

“There are some hearts that are all generosity,” she said, resting her
head upon his shoulder. The scene made her tremble to such a degree that
her comb fell, her hair rolled down, and she turned pale. The count,
holding her up, gave a sort of groan as he felt her fainting; he caught
her in his arms as he might a child, and carried her to the sofa in the
salon, where we all surrounded her. Henriette held my hand in hers as if
to tell me that we two alone knew the secret of that scene, so simple in
itself, so heart-rending to her.

“I do wrong,” she said to me in a low voice, when the count left the
room to fetch a glass of orange-flower water. “I have many wrongs to
repent of towards you; I wished to fill you with despair when I ought to
have received you mercifully. Dear, you are kindness itself, and I alone
can appreciate it. Yes, I know there is a kindness prompted by passion.
Men have various ways of being kind; some from contempt, others from
impulse, from calculation, through indolence of nature; but you, my
friend, you have been absolutely kind.”

“If that be so,” I replied, “remember that all that is good or great in
me comes through you. You know well that I am of your making.”

“That word is enough for any woman’s happiness,” she said, as the count
re-entered the room. “I feel better,” she said, rising; “I want air.”

We went down to the terrace, fragrant with the acacias which were still
in bloom. She had taken my right arm, and pressed it against her heart,
thus expressing her sad thoughts; but they were, she said, of a sadness
dear to her. No doubt she would gladly have been alone with me; but her
imagination, inexpert in women’s wiles, did not suggest to her any way
of sending her children and the count back to the house. We therefore
talked on indifferent subjects, while she pondered a means of pouring a
few last thoughts from her heart to mine.

“It is a long time since I have driven out,” she said, looking at the
beauty of the evening. “Monsieur, will you please order the carriage
that I may take a turn?”

She knew that after evening prayer she could not speak with me, for the
count was sure to want his backgammon. She might have returned to the
warm and fragrant terrace after her husband had gone to bed, but she
feared, perhaps, to trust herself beneath those shadows, or to walk by
the balustrade where our eyes could see the course of the Indre through
the dear valley. As the silent and sombre vaults of a cathedral lift
the soul to prayer, so leafy ways, lighted by the moon, perfumed with
penetrating odors, alive with the murmuring noises of the spring-tide,
stir the fibres and weaken the resolves of those who love. The country
calms the old, but excites the young. We knew it well. Two strokes of
the bell announced the hour of prayer. The countess shivered.

“Dear Henriette, are you ill?”

“There is no Henriette,” she said. “Do not bring her back. She was
capricious and exacting; now you have a friend whose courage has been
strengthened by the words which heaven itself dictated to you. We will
talk of this later. We must be punctual at prayers, for it is my day to
lead them.”

As Madame de Mortsauf said the words in which she begged the help of God
through all the adversities of life, a tone came into her voice which
struck all present. Did she use her gift of second sight to foresee the
terrible emotion she was about to endure through my forgetfulness of an
engagement made with Arabella?

“We have time to make three kings before the horses are harnessed,” said
the count, dragging me back to the salon. “You can go and drive with my
wife, and I’ll go to bed.”

The game was stormy, like all others. The countess heard the count’s
voice either from her room or from Madeleine’s.

“You show a strange hospitality,” she said, re-entering the salon.

I looked at her with amazement; I could not get accustomed to the change
in her; formerly she would have been most careful not to protect
me against the count; then it gladdened her that I should share her
sufferings and bear them with patience for love of her.

“I would give my life,” I whispered in her ear, “if I could hear you say
again, as you once said, ‘Poor dear, poor dear!’”

She lowered her eyes, remembering the moment to which I alluded, yet her
glance turned to me beneath her eyelids, expressing the joy of a
woman who finds the mere passing tones from her heart preferred to the
delights of another love. The count was losing the game; he said he was
tired, as an excuse to give it up, and we went to walk on the lawn while
waiting for the carriage. When the count left us, such pleasure shone on
my face that Madame de Mortsauf questioned me by a look of surprise and
curiosity.

“Henriette does exist,” I said. “You love me still. You wound me with an
evident intention to break my heart. I may yet be happy!”

“There was but a fragment of that poor woman left, and you have now
destroyed even that,” she said. “God be praised; he gives me strength
to bear my righteous martyrdom. Yes, I still love you, and I might have
erred; the English woman shows me the abyss.”

We got into the carriage and the coachman asked for orders.

“Take the road to Chinon by the avenue, and come back by the Charlemagne
moor and the road to Sache.”

“What day is it?” I asked, with too much eagerness.

“Saturday.”

“Then don’t go that way, madame, the road will be crowded with
poultry-men and their carts returning from Tours.”

“Do as I told you,” she said to the coachman. We knew the tones of our
voices too well to be able to hide from each other our least emotion.
Henriette understood all.

“You did not think of the poultry-men when you appointed this evening,”
 she said with a tinge of irony. “Lady Dudley is at Tours, and she
is coming here to meet you; do not deny it. ‘What day is it?—the
poultry-men—their carts!’ Did you ever take notice of such things in
our old drives?”

“It only shows that at Clochegourde I forget everything,” I answered,
simply.

“She is coming to meet you?”

“Yes.”

“At what hour?”

“Half-past eleven.”

“Where?”

“On the moor.”

“Do not deceive me; is it not at the walnut-tree?”

“On the moor.”

“We will go there,” she said, “and I shall see her.”

When I heard these words I regarded my future life as settled. I at once
resolved to marry Lady Dudley and put an end to the miserable struggle
which threatened to exhaust my sensibilities and destroy by these
repeated shocks the delicate delights which had hitherto resembled the
flower of fruits. My sullen silence wounded the countess, the grandeur
of whose mind I misjudged.

“Do not be angry with me,” she said, in her golden voice. “This,
dear, is my punishment. You can never be loved as you are here,” she
continued, laying my hand upon her heart. “I now confess it; but Lady
Dudley has saved me. To her the stains,—I do not envy them,—to me the
glorious love of angels! I have traversed vast tracts of thought since
you returned here. I have judged life. Lift up the soul and you rend it;
the higher we go the less sympathy we meet; instead of suffering in the
valley, we suffer in the skies, as the soaring eagle bears in his heart
the arrow of some common herdsman. I comprehend at last that earth and
heaven are incompatible. Yes, to those who would live in the celestial
sphere God must be all in all. We must love our friends as we love our
children,—for them, not for ourselves. Self is the cause of misery and
grief. My soul is capable of soaring higher than the eagle; there is
a love which cannot fail me. But to live for this earthly life is too
debas­ing,—here the selfishness of the senses reigns supreme over the
spirituality of the angel that is within us. The pleasures of passion
are stormy, followed by enervating anxieties which impair the vigor of
the soul. I came to the shores of the sea where such tempests rage;
I have seen them too near; they have wrapped me in their clouds; the
billows did not break at my feet, they caught me in a rough embrace
which chilled my heart. No! I must escape to higher regions; I should
perish on the shores of this vast sea. I see in you, as in all others
who have grieved me, the guardian of my virtue. My life has been mingled
with anguish, fortunately proportioned to my strength; it has thus been
kept free from evil passions, from seductive peace, and ever near to
God. Our attachment was the mistaken attempt, the innocent effort of
two children striving to satisfy their own hearts, God, and men—folly,
Felix! Ah,” she said quickly, “what does that woman call you?”

“‘Amedee,’” I answered, “‘Felix’ is a being apart, who belongs to none
but you.”

“‘Henriette’ is slow to die,” she said, with a gentle smile, “but
die she will at the first effort of the humble Christian, the
self-respecting mother; she whose virtue tottered yesterday and is
firm to-day. What may I say to you? This. My life has been, and is,
consistent with itself in all its circumstances, great and small. The
heart to which the rootlets of my first affection should have clung, my
mother’s heart, was closed to me, in spite of my persistence in seeking
a cleft through which they might have slipped. I was a girl; I came
after the death of three boys; and I vainly strove to take their place
in the hearts of my parents; the wound I gave to the family pride was
never healed. When my gloomy childhood was over and I knew my aunt,
death took her from me all too soon. Monsieur de Mortsauf, to whom I
vowed myself, has repeatedly, nay without respite, smitten me, not being
himself aware of it, poor man! His love has the simple-minded egotism
our children show to us. He has no conception of the harm he does me,
and he is heartily forgiven for it. My children, those dear children
who are bound to my flesh through their sufferings, to my soul by their
characters, to my nature by their innocent happiness,—those children
were surely given to show me how much strength and patience a mother’s
breast contains. Yes, my children are my virtues. You know how my heart
has been harrowed for them, by them, in spite of them. To be a mother
was, for me, to buy the right to suffer. When Hagar cried in the desert
an angel came and opened a spring of living water for that poor slave;
but I, when the limpid stream to which (do you remember?) you tried to
guide me flowed past Clochegourde, its waters changed to bitterness for
me. Yes, the sufferings you have inflicted on my soul are terrible. God,
no doubt, will pardon those who know affection only through its pains.
But if the keenest of these pains has come to me through you, perhaps I
deserved them. God is not unjust. Ah, yes, Felix, a kiss furtively taken
may be a crime. Perhaps it is just that a woman should harshly expiate
the few steps taken apart from husband and children that she might walk
alone with thoughts and memories that were not of them, and so walking,
marry her soul to another. Perhaps it is the worst of crimes when the
inward being lowers itself to the region of human kisses. When a woman
bends to receive her husband’s kiss with a mask upon her face, that is
a crime! It is a crime to think of a future springing from a death, a
crime to imagine a motherhood without terrors, handsome children playing
in the evening with a beloved father before the eyes of a happy mother.
Yes, I sinned, sinned greatly. I have loved the penances inflicted by
the Church,—which did not redeem the faults, for the priest was too
indulgent. God has placed the punishment in the faults themselves,
committing the execution of his vengeance to the one for whom the faults
were committed. When I gave my hair, did I not give myself? Why did I so
often dress in white? because I seemed the more your lily; did you not
see me here, for the first time, all in white? Alas! I have loved my
children less, for all intense affection is stolen from the natural
affections. Felix, do you not see that all suffering has its meaning.
Strike me, wound me even more than Monsieur de Mortsauf and my
children’s state have wounded me. That woman is the instrument of God’s
anger; I will meet her without hatred; I will smile upon her; under pain
of being neither Christian, wife, nor mother, I ought to love her. If,
as you tell me, I contributed to keep your heart unsoiled by the world,
that Englishwoman ought not to hate me. A woman should love the mother
of the man she loves, and I am your mother. What place have I sought in
your heart? that left empty by Madame de Vandenesse. Yes, yes, you have
always complained of my coldness; yes, I am indeed your mother only.
Forgive me therefore the involuntary harshness with which I met you on
your return; a mother ought to rejoice that her son is so well loved—”

She laid her head for a moment on my breast, repeating the words,
“Forgive me! oh, forgive me!” in a voice that was neither her girlish
voice with its joyous notes, nor the woman’s voice with despotic
endings; not the sighing sound of the mother’s woe, but an agonizing new
voice for new sorrows.

“You, Felix,” she presently continued, growing animated; “you are the
friend who can do no wrong. Ah! you have lost nothing in my heart; do
not blame yourself, do not feel the least remorse. It was the height
of selfishness in me to ask you to sacrifice the joys of life to an
impossible future; impossible, because to realize it a woman must
abandon her children, abdicate her position, and renounce eternity. Many
a time I have thought you higher than I; you were great and noble, I,
petty and criminal. Well, well, it is settled now; I can be to you no
more than a light from above, sparkling and cold, but unchanging. Only,
Felix, let me not love the brother I have chosen without return. Love
me, cherish me! The love of a sister has no dangerous to-morrow, no
hours of difficulty. You will never find it necessary to deceive the
indulgent heart which will live in future within your life, grieve for
your griefs, be joyous with your joys, which will love the women who
make you happy, and resent their treachery. I never had a brother to
love in that way. Be noble enough to lay aside all self-love and turn
our attachment, hitherto so doubtful and full of trouble, into this
sweet and sacred love. In this way I shall be enabled to still live. I
will begin to-night by taking Lady Dudley’s hand.”

She did not weep as she said these words so full of bitter knowledge,
by which, casting aside the last remaining veil which hid her soul from
mine, she showed by how many ties she had linked herself to me, how many
chains I had hewn apart. Our emotions were so great that for a time we
did not notice it was raining heavily.

“Will Madame la comtesse wait here under shelter?” asked the coachman,
pointing to the chief inn of Ballan.

She made a sign of assent, and we stayed nearly half an hour under the
vaulted entrance, to the great surprise of the inn-people who wondered
what brought Madame de Mortsauf on that road at eleven o’clock at night.
Was she going to Tours? Had she come from there? When the storm ceased
and the rain turned to what is called in Touraine a “brouee,” which does
not hinder the moon from shining through the higher mists as the wind
with its upper currents whirls them away, the coachman drove from our
shelter, and, to my great delight, turned to go back the way we came.

“Follow my orders,” said the countess, gently.

We now took the road across the Charlemagne moor, where the rain began
again. Half-way across I heard the barking of Arabella’s dog; a horse
came suddenly from beneath a clump of oaks, jumped the ditch which
owners of property dig around their cleared lands when they consider
them suitable for cultivation, and carried Lady Dudley to the moor to
meet the carriage.

“What pleasure to meet a love thus if it can be done without sin,” said
Henriette.

The barking of the dog had told Lady Dudley that I was in the carriage.
She thought, no doubt, that I had brought it to meet her on account of
the rain. When we reached the spot where she was waiting, she urged her
horse to the side of the road with the equestrian dexterity for which
she was famous, and which to Henriette seemed marvellous.

“Amedee,” she said, and the name in her English pronunciation had a
fairy-like charm.

“He is here, madame,” said the countess, looking at the fantastic
creature plainly visible in the moonlight, whose impatient face was
oddly swathed in locks of hair now out of curl.

You know with what swiftness two women examine each other. The
Englishwoman recognized her rival, and was gloriously English; she gave
us a look full of insular contempt, and disappeared in the underbrush
with the rapidity of an arrow.

“Drive on quickly to Clochegourde,” cried the countess, to whom that
cutting look was like the blow of an axe upon her heart.

The coachman turned to get upon the road to Chinon which was better than
that to Sache. As the carriage again approached the moor we heard the
furious galloping of Arabella’s horse and the steps of her dog. All
three were skirting the wood behind the bushes.

“She is going; you will lose her forever,” said Henriette.

“Let her go,” I answered, “and without a regret.”

“Oh, poor woman!” cried the countess, with a sort of compassionate
horror. “Where will she go?”

“Back to La Grenadiere,—a little house near Saint-Cyr,” I said, “where
she is staying.”

Just as we were entering the avenue of Clochegourde Arabella’s dog
barked joyfully and bounded up to the carriage.

“She is here before us!” cried the countess; then after a pause she
added, “I have never seen a more beautiful woman. What a hand and what
a figure! Her complexion outdoes the lily, her eyes are literally bright
as diamonds. But she rides too well; she loves to display her strength;
I think her violent and too active,—also too bold for our conventions.
The woman who recognizes no law is apt to listen only to her caprices.
Those who seek to shine, to make a stir, have not the gift of constancy.
Love needs tranquillity; I picture it to myself like a vast lake in
which the lead can find no bottom; where tempests may be violent, but
are rare and controlled within certain limits; where two beings live on
a flowery isle far from the world whose luxury and display offend them.
Still, love must take the imprint of the character. Perhaps I am wrong.
If nature’s elements are compelled to take certain forms determined by
climate, why is it not the same with the feelings of individuals? No
doubt sentiments, feelings, which hold to the general law in the mass,
differ in expression only. Each soul has its own method. Lady Dudley is
the strong woman who can traverse distances and act with the vigor of a
man; she would rescue her lover and kill jailers and guards; while other
women can only love with their whole souls; in moments of danger they
kneel down to pray, and die. Which of the two women suits you best? That
is the question. Yes, yes, Lady Dudley must surely love; she has made
many sacrifices. Perhaps she will love you when you have ceased to love
her!”

“Dear angel,” I said, “let me ask the question you asked me; how is it
that you know these things?”

“Every sorrow teaches a lesson, and I have suffered on so many points
that my knowledge is vast.”

My servant had heard the order given, and thinking we should return by
the terraces he held my horse ready for me in the avenue. Arabella’s
dog had scented the horse, and his mistress, drawn by very natural
curiosity, had followed the animal through the woods to the avenue.

“Go and make your peace,” said Henriette, smiling without a tinge of
sadness. “Say to Lady Dudley how much she mistakes my intention; I
wished to show her the true value of the treasure which has fallen to
her; my heart holds none but kind feelings, above all neither anger nor
contempt. Explain to her that I am her sister, and not her rival.”

“I shall not go,” I said.

“Have you never discovered,” she said with lofty pride, “that certain
propitiations are insulting? Go!”

I rode towards Lady Dudley wishing to know the state of her mind. “If
she would only be angry and leave me,” I thought, “I could return to
Clochegourde.”

The dog led me to an oak, from which, as I came up, Arabella galloped
crying out to me, “Come! away! away!” All that I could do was to follow
her to Saint Cyr, which we reached about midnight.

“That lady is in perfect health,” said Arabella as she dismounted.

Those who know her can alone imagine the satire contained in that
remark, dryly said in a tone which meant, “I should have died!”

“I forbid you to utter any of your sarcasms about Madame de Mortsauf,” I
said.

“Do I displease your Grace in remarking upon the perfect health of one
so dear to your precious heart? Frenchwomen hate, so I am told, even
their lover’s dog. In England we love all that our masters love; we hate
all they hate, because we are flesh of their flesh. Permit me therefore
to love this lady as much as you yourself love her. Only, my dear
child,” she added, clasping me in her arms which were damp with rain,
“if you betray me, I shall not be found either lying down or standing
up, not in a carriage with liveried lackeys, nor on horseback on the
moors of Charlemagne, nor on any other moor beneath the skies, nor in my
own bed, nor beneath a roof of my forefathers; I shall not be anywhere,
for I will live no longer. I was born in Lancashire, a country where
women die for love. Know you, and give you up? I will yield you to none,
not even to Death, for I should die with you.”

She led me to her rooms, where comfort had already spread its charms.

“Love her, dear,” I said warmly. “She loves you sincerely, not in jest.”

“Sincerely! you poor child!” she said, unfastening her habit.

With a lover’s vanity I tried to exhibit Henriette’s noble character to
this imperious creature. While her waiting-woman, who did not understand
a word of French, arranged her hair I endeavored to picture Madame de
Mortsauf by sketching her life; I repeated many of the great thoughts
she had uttered at a crisis when nearly all women become either petty or
bad. Though Arabella appeared to be paying no attention she did not lose
a single word.

“I am delighted,” she said when we were alone, “to learn your taste
for pious conversation. There’s an old vicar on one of my estates
who understands writing sermons better than any one I know; the
country-people like him, for he suits his prosing to his hearers. I’ll
write to my father to-morrow and ask him to send the good man here by
steamboat; you can meet him in Paris, and when once you have heard him
you will never wish to listen to any one else,—all the more because his
health is perfect. His moralities won’t give you shocks that make you
weep; they flow along without tempests, like a limpid stream, and
will send you to sleep. Every evening you can if you like satisfy your
passion for sermons by digesting one with your dinner. English morality,
I do assure you, is as superior to that of Touraine as our cutlery,
our plate, and our horses are to your knives and your turf. Do me
the kindness to listen to my vicar; promise me. I am only a woman, my
dearest; I can love, I can die for you if you will; but I have never
studied at Eton, or at Oxford, or in Edinburgh. I am neither a doctor of
laws nor a reverend; I can’t preach morality; in fact, I am altogether
unfit for it, I should be awkward if I tried. I don’t blame your tastes;
you might have others more depraved, and I should still endeavor
to conform to them, for I want you to find near me all you like
best,—pleasures of love, pleasures of food, pleasures of piety, good
claret, and virtuous Christians. Shall I wear hair-cloth to-night? She
is very lucky, that woman, to suit you in morality. From what college
did she graduate? Poor I, who can only give you myself, who can only be
your slave—”

“Then why did you rush away when I wanted to bring you together?”

“Are you crazy, Amedee? I could go from Paris to Rome disguised as a
valet; I would do the most unreasonable thing for your sake; but how can
you expect me to speak to a woman on the public roads who has never
been presented to me,—and who, besides, would have preached me a sermon
under three heads? I speak to peasants, and if I am hungry I would ask a
workman to share his bread with me and pay him in guineas,—that is all
proper enough; but to stop a carriage on the highway, like the gentlemen
of the road in England, is not at all within my code of manners. You
poor child, you know only how to love; you don’t know how to live.
Besides, I am not like you as yet, dear angel; I don’t like morality.
Still, I am capable of great efforts to please you. Yes, I will go to
work; I will learn how to preach; you shall have no more kisses without
verses of the Bible interlarded.”

She used her power and abused it as soon as she saw in my eyes the
ardent expression which was always there when she began her sorceries.
She triumphed over everything, and I complacently told myself that the
woman who loses all, sacrifices the future, and makes love her only
virtue, is far above Catholic polemics.

“So she loves herself better than she loves you?” Arabella went on. “She
sets something that is not you above you. Is that love? how can we women
find anything to value in ourselves except that which you value in us?
No woman, no matter how fine a moralist she may be, is the equal of a
man. Tread upon us, kill us; never embarrass your lives on our account.
It is for us to die, for you to live, great and honored. For us the
dagger in your hand; for you our pardoning love. Does the sun think of
the gnats in his beams, that live by his light? they stay as long as
they can and when he withdraws his face they die—”

“Or fly somewhere else,” I said interrupting her.

“Yes, somewhere else,” she replied, with an indifference that would have
piqued any man into using the power with which she invested him. “Do
you really think it is worthy of womanhood to make a man eat his bread
buttered with virtue, and to persuade him that religion is incompatible
with love? Am I a reprobate? A woman either gives herself or she
refuses. But to refuse and moralize is a double wrong, and is contrary
to the rule of the right in all lands. Here, you will get only excellent
sandwiches prepared by the hand of your servant Arabella, whose sole
morality is to imagine caresses no man has yet felt and which the angels
inspire.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
I know nothing more destructive than the wit of an Englishwoman; she
gives it the eloquent gravity, the tone of pompous conviction with which
the British hide the absurdities of their life of prejudice. French wit
and humor, on the other hand, is like a lace with which our women adorn
the joys they give and the quarrels they invent; it is a mental jewelry,
as charming as their pretty dresses. English wit is an acid which
corrodes all those on whom it falls until it bares their bones, which it
scrapes and polishes. The tongue of a clever Englishwoman is like that
of a tiger tearing the flesh from the bone when he is only in play.
All-powerful weapon of a sneering devil, English satire leaves a deadly
poison in the wound it makes. Arabella chose to show her power like the
sultan who, to prove his dexterity, cut off the heads of unoffending
beings with his own scimitar.

“My angel,” she said, “I can talk morality too if I choose. I have asked
myself whether I commit a crime in loving you; whether I violate the
divine laws; and I find that my love for you is both natural and pious.
Why did God create some beings handsomer than others if not to show us
that we ought to adore them? The crime would be in not loving you. This
lady insults you by confounding you with other men; the laws of morality
are not applicable to you; for God has created you above them. Am I
not drawing nearer to divine love in loving you? will God punish a poor
woman for seeking the divine? Your great and luminous heart so resembles
the heavens that I am like the gnats which flutter about the torches
of a fete and burn themselves; are they to be punished for their error?
besides, is it an error? may it not be pure worship of the light? They
perish of too much piety,--if you call it perishing to fling one’s self
on the breast of him we love. I have the weakness to love you, whereas
that woman has the strength to remain in her Catholic shrine. Now, don’t
frown. You think I wish her ill. No, I do not. I adore the morality
which has led her to leave you free, and enables me to win you and hold
you forever--for you are mine forever, are you not?”

“Yes.”

“Forever and ever?”

“Yes.”

“Ah! I have found favor in my lord! I alone have understood his worth!
She knows how to cultivate her estate, you say. Well, I leave that to
farmers; I cultivate your heart.”

I try to recall this intoxicating babble, that I may picture to you the
woman as she is, confirm all I have said of her, and let you into
the secret of what happened later. But how shall I describe the
accompaniment of the words? She sought to annihilate by the passion of
her impetuous love the impressions left in my heart by the chaste and
dignified love of my Henriette. Lady Dudley had seen the countess as
plainly as the countess had seen her; each had judged the other. The
force of Arabella’s attack revealed to me the extent of her fear, and
her secret admiration for her rival. In the morning I found her with
tearful eyes, complaining that she had not slept.

“What troubles you?” I said.

“I fear that my excessive love will ruin me,” she answered; “I have
given all. Wiser than I, that woman possesses something that you still
desire. If you prefer her, forget me; I will not trouble you with my
sorrows, my remorse, my sufferings; no, I will go far away and die, like
a plant deprived of the life-giving sun.”

She was able to wring protestations of love from my reluctant lips,
which filled her with joy.

“Ah!” she exclaimed, drying her eyes, “I am happy. Go back to her; I do
not choose to owe you to the force of my love, but to the action of your
own will. If you return here I shall know that you love me as much as I
love you, the possibility of which I have always doubted.”

She persuaded me to return to Clochegourde. The false position in which
I thus placed myself did not strike me while still under the influence
of her wiles. Yet, had I refused to return I should have given Lady
Dudley a triumph over Henriette. Arabella would then have taken me
to Paris. To go now to Clochegourde was an open insult to Madame de
Mortsauf; in that case Arabella was sure of me. Did any woman ever
pardon such crimes against love? Unless she were an angel descended
from the skies, instead of a purified spirit ascending to them, a loving
woman would rather see her lover die than know him happy with another.
Thus, look at it as I would, my situation, after I had once left
Clochegourde for the Grenadiere, was as fatal to the love of my choice
as it was profitable to the transient love that held me. Lady Dudley had
calculated all this with consummate cleverness. She owned to me later
that if she had not met Madame de Mortsauf on the moor she had intended
to compromise me by haunting Clochegourde until she did so.

When I met the countess that morning, and found her pale and depressed
like one who has not slept all night, I was conscious of exercising the
instinctive perception given to hearts still fresh and generous to show
them the true bearing of actions little regarded by the world at large,
but judged as criminal by lofty spirits. Like a child going down a
precipice in play and gathering flowers, who sees with dread that it
can never climb that height again, feels itself alone, with night
approaching, and hears the howls of animals, so I now knew that she and
I were separated by a universe. A wail arose within our souls like an
echo of that woeful “Consummatum est” heard in the churches on Good
Friday at the hour the Saviour died,--a dreadful scene which awes young
souls whose first love is religion. All Henriette’s illusions were
killed at one blow; her heart had endured its passion. She did not look
at me; she refused me the light that for six long years had shone upon
my life. She knew well that the spring of the effulgent rays shed by our
eyes was in our souls, to which they served as pathways to reach
each other, to blend them in one, meeting, parting, playing, like two
confiding women who tell each other all. Bitterly I felt the wrong of
bringing beneath this roof, where pleasure was unknown, a face on which
the wings of pleasure had shaken their prismatic dust. If, the night
before, I had allowed Lady Dudley to depart alone, if I had then
returned to Clochegourde, where, it may be, Henriette awaited me,
perhaps--perhaps Madame de Mortsauf might not so cruelly have
resolved to be my sister. But now she paid me many ostentatious
attentions,--playing her part vehemently for the very purpose of not
changing it. During breakfast she showed me a thousand civilities,
humiliating attentions, caring for me as though I were a sick man whose
fate she pitied.

“You were out walking early,” said the count; “I hope you have brought
back a good appetite, you whose stomach is not yet destroyed.”

This remark, which brought the smile of a sister to Henriette’s lips,
completed my sense of the ridicule of my position. It was impossible to
be at Clochegourde by day and Saint-Cyr by night. During the day I felt
how difficult it was to become the friend of a woman we have long loved.
The transition, easy enough when years have brought it about, is like an
illness in youth. I was ashamed; I cursed the pleasure Lady Dudley gave
me; I wished that Henriette would demand my blood. I could not tear her
rival in pieces before her, for she avoided speaking of her; indeed,
had I spoken of Arabella, Henriette, noble and sublime to the inmost
recesses of her heart, would have despised my infamy. After five years
of delightful intercourse we now had nothing to say to each other; our
words had no connection with our thoughts; we were hiding from each
other our intolerable pain,--we, whose mutual sufferings had been our
first interpreter.

Henriette assumed a cheerful look for me as for herself, but she was
sad. She spoke of herself as my sister, and yet found no ground on
which to converse; and we remained for the greater part of the time
in constrained silence. She increased my inward misery by feigning to
believe that she was the only victim.

“I suffer more than you,” I said to her at a moment when my self-styled
sister was betrayed into a feminine sarcasm.

“How so?” she said haughtily.

“Because I am the one to blame.”

At last her manner became so cold and indifferent that I resolved to
leave Clochegourde. That evening, on the terrace, I said farewell to the
whole family, who were there assembled. They all followed me to the lawn
where my horse was waiting. The countess came to me as I took the bridle
in my hand.

“Let us walk down the avenue together, alone,” she said.

I gave her my arm, and we passed through the courtyard with slow and
measured steps, as though our rhythmic movement were consoling to us.
When we reached the grove of trees which forms a corner of the boundary
she stopped.

“Farewell, my friend,” she said, throwing her head upon my breast and
her arms around my neck, “Farewell, we shall never meet again. God has
given me the sad power to look into the future. Do you remember
the terror that seized me the day you first came back, so young, so
handsome! and I saw you turn your back on me as you do this day when
you are leaving Clochegourde and going to Saint-Cyr? Well, once again,
during the past night I have seen into the future. Friend, we are
speaking together for the last time. I can hardly now say a few words
to you, for it is but a part of me that speaks at all. Death has already
seized on something in me. You have taken the mother from her children,
I now ask you to take her place to them. You can; Jacques and Madeleine
love you--as if you had always made them suffer.”

“Death!” I cried, frightened as I looked at her and beheld the fire of
her shining eyes, of which I can give no idea to those who have never
known their dear ones struck down by her fatal malady, unless I compare
those eyes to balls of burnished silver. “Die!” I said. “Henriette, I
command you to live. You used to ask an oath of me, I now ask one
of you. Swear to me that you will send for Origet and obey him in
everything.”

“Would you oppose the mercy of God?” she said, interrupting me with a
cry of despair at being thus misunderstood.

“You do not love me enough to obey me blindly, as that miserable Lady
Dudley does?”

“Yes, yes, I will do all you ask,” she cried, goaded by jealousy.

“Then I stay,” I said, kissing her on the eyelids.

Frightened at the words, she escaped from my arms and leaned against a
tree; then she turned and walked rapidly homeward without looking back.
But I followed her; she was weeping and praying. When we reached the
lawn I took her hand and kissed it respectfully. This submission touched
her.

“I am yours--forever, and as you will,” I said; “for I love you as your
aunt loved you.”

She trembled and wrung my hand.

“One look,” I said, “one more, one last of our old looks! The woman who
gives herself wholly,” I cried, my soul illumined by the glance she gave
me, “gives less of life and soul than I have now received. Henriette,
thou art my best-beloved--my only love.”

“I shall live!” she said; “but cure yourself as well.”

That look had effaced the memory of Arabella’s sarcasms. Thus I was the
plaything of the two irreconcilable passions I have now described to
you; I was influenced by each alternately. I loved an angel and a demon;
two women equally beautiful,--one adorned with all the virtues which we
decry through hatred of our own imperfections, the other with all the
vices which we deify through selfishness. Returning along that avenue,
looking back again and again at Madame de Mortsauf, as she leaned
against a tree surrounded by her children who waved their handkerchiefs,
I detected in my soul an emotion of pride in finding myself the arbiter
of two such destinies; the glory, in ways so different, of women so
distinguished; proud of inspiring such great passions that death must
come to whichever I abandoned. Ah! believe me, that passing conceit has
been doubly punished!

I know not what demon prompted me to remain with Arabella and await
the moment when the death of the count might give me Henriette; for she
would ever love me. Her harshness, her tears, her remorse, her Christian
resignation, were so many eloquent signs of a sentiment that could no
more be effaced from her heart than from mine. Walking slowly down that
pretty avenue and making these reflections, I was no longer twenty-five,
I was fifty years old. A man passes in a moment, even more quickly than
a woman, from youth to middle age. Though long ago I drove these evil
thoughts away from me, I was then possessed by them, I must avow it.
Perhaps I owed their presence in my mind to the Tuileries, to the king’s
cabinet. Who could resist the polluting spirit of Louis XVIII.?

When I reached the end of the avenue I turned and rushed back in the
twinkling of an eye, seeing that Henriette was still there, and alone! I
went to bid her a last farewell, bathed in repentant tears, the cause
of which she never knew. Tears sincere indeed; given, although I knew it
not, to noble loves forever lost, to virgin emotions--those flowers
of our life which cannot bloom again. Later, a man gives nothing, he
receives; he loves himself in his mistress; but in youth he loves his
mistress in himself. Later, we inoculate with our tastes, perhaps our
vices, the woman who loves us; but in the dawn of life she whom we love
conveys to us her virtues, her conscience. She invites us with a
smile to the noble life; from her we learn the self-devotion which she
practises. Woe to the man who has not had his Henriette. Woe to that
other one who has never known a Lady Dudley. The latter, if he marries,
will not be able to keep his wife; the other will be abandoned by his
mistress. But joy to him who can find the two women in one woman; happy
the man, dear Natalie, whom you love.

After my return to Paris Arabella and I became more intimate than ever.
Soon we insensibly abandoned all the conventional restrictions I had
carefully imposed, the strict observance of which often makes the world
forgive the false position in which Lady Dudley had placed herself.
Society, which delights in looking behind appearances, sanctions much as
soon as it knows the secrets they conceal. Lovers who live in the great
world make a mistake in flinging down these barriers exacted by the law
of salons; they do wrong not to obey scrupulously all conventions which
the manners and customs of a community impose,--less for the sake of
others than for their own. Outward respect to be maintained, comedies to
play, concealments to be managed; all such strategy of love occupies the
life, renews desire, and protects the heart against the palsy of
habit. But all young passions, being, like youth itself, essentially
spendthrift, raze their forests to the ground instead of merely cutting
the timber. Arabella adopted none of these bourgeois ideas, and yielded
to them only to please me; she wished to exhibit me to the eyes of all
Paris as her “sposo.” She employed her powers of seduction to keep me
under her roof, for she was not content with a rumored scandal which,
for want of proof, was only whispered behind the fans. Seeing her so
happy in committing an imprudence which frankly admitted her position,
how could I help believing in her love?

But no sooner was I plunged into the comforts of illegal marriage
than despair seized upon me; I saw my life bound to a course in direct
defiance of the ideas and the advice given me by Henriette. Thenceforth
I lived in the sort of rage we find in consumptive patients who, knowing
their end is near, cannot endure that their lungs should be examined.
There was no corner in my heart where I could fly to escape suffering;
an avenging spirit filled me incessantly with thoughts on which I dared
not dwell. My letters to Henriette depicted this moral malady and did
her infinite harm. “At the cost of so many treasures lost, I wished you
to be at least happy,” she wrote in the only answer I received. But
I was not happy. Dear Natalie, happiness is absolute; it allows of
no comparisons. My first ardor over, I necessarily compared the two
women,--a contrast I had never yet studied. In fact, all great passions
press so strongly on the character that at first they check its
asperities and cover the track of habits which constitute our defects
and our better qualities. But later, when two lovers are accustomed to
each other, the features of their moral physiognomies reappear; they
mutually judge each other, and it often happens during this reaction
of the character after passion, that natural antipathies leading to
disunion (which superficial people seize upon to accuse the human heart
of instability) come to the surface. This period now began with me.
Less blinded by seductions, and dissecting, as it were, my pleasure, I
undertook, without perhaps intending to do so, a critical examination of
Lady Dudley which resulted to her injury.

In the first place, I found her wanting in the qualities of mind which
distinguish Frenchwomen and make them so delightful to love; as all
those who have had the opportunity of loving in both countries declare.
When a Frenchwoman loves she is metamorphosed; her noted coquetry is
used to deck her love; she abandons her dangerous vanity and lays no
claim to any merit but that of loving well. She espouses the interests,
the hatreds, the friendships, of the man she loves; she acquires in
a day the experience of a man of business; she studies the code, she
comprehends the mechanism of credit, and could manage a banker’s office;
naturally heedless and prodigal, she will make no mistakes and waste not
a single louis. She becomes, in turn, mother, adviser, doctor, giving to
all her transformations a grace of happiness which reveals, in its every
detail, her infinite love. She combines the special qualities of the
women of other countries and gives unity to the mixture by her wit, that
truly French product, which enlivens, sanctions, justifies, and varies
all, thus relieving the monotony of a sentiment which rests on a single
tense of a single verb. The Frenchwoman loves always, without abatement
and without fatigue, in public or in solitude. In public she uses a tone
which has meaning for one only; she speaks by silence; she looks at you
with lowered eyelids. If the occasion prevents both speech and look she
will use the sand and write a word with the point of her little foot;
her love will find expression even in sleep; in short, she bends the
world to her love. The Englishwoman, on the contrary, makes her love
bend to the world. Educated to maintain the icy manners, the Britannic
and egotistic deportment which I described to you, she opens and
shuts her heart with the ease of a British mechanism. She possesses
an impenetrable mask, which she puts on or takes off phlegmatically.
Passionate as an Italian when no eye sees her, she becomes coldly
dignified before the world. A lover may well doubt his empire when he
sees the immobility of face, the aloofness of countenance, and hears
the calm voice, with which an Englishwoman leaves her boudoir. Hypocrisy
then becomes indifference; she has forgotten all.

Certainly the woman who can lay aside her love like a garment may be
thought to be capable of changing it. What tempests arise in the heart
of a man, stirred by wounded self-love, when he sees a woman taking and
dropping and again picking up her love like a piece of embroidery. These
women are too completely mistresses of themselves ever to belong wholly
to you; they are too much under the influence of society ever to let you
reign supreme. Where a Frenchwoman comforts by a look, or betrays her
impatience with visitors by witty jests, an Englishwoman’s silence is
absolute; it irritates the soul and frets the mind. These women are so
constantly, and, under all circumstances, on their dignity, that to
most of them fashion reigns omnipotent even over their pleasures. An
Englishwoman forces everything into form; though in her case the love of
form does not produce the sentiment of art. No matter what may be said
against it, Protestantism and Catholicism explain the differences
which make the love of Frenchwomen so far superior to the calculating,
reasoning love of Englishwomen. Protestantism doubts, searches, and
kills belief; it is the death of art and love. Where worldliness is all
in all, worldly people must needs obey; but passionate hearts flee from
it; to them its laws are insupportable.

You can now understand what a shock my self-love received when I found
that Lady Dudley could not live without the world, and that the English
system of two lives was familiar to her. It was no sacrifice she felt
called upon to make; on the contrary she fell naturally into two forms
of life that were inimical to each other. When she loved she loved
madly,--no woman of any country could be compared to her; but when the
curtain fell upon that fairy scene she banished even the memory of
it. In public she never answered to a look or a smile; she was neither
mistress nor slave; she was like an ambassadress, obliged to round her
phrases and her elbows; she irritated me by her composure, and outraged
my heart with her decorum. Thus she degraded love to a mere need,
instead of raising it to an ideal through enthusiasm. She expressed
neither fear, nor regrets, nor desire; but at a given hour her
tenderness reappeared like a fire suddenly lighted.

In which of these two women ought I to believe? I felt, as it were by
a thousand pin-pricks, the infinite differences between Henriette and
Arabella. When Madame de Mortsauf left me for a while she seemed to
leave to the air the duty of reminding me of her; the folds of her gown
as she went away spoke to the eye, as their undulating sound to the ear
when she returned; infinite tenderness was in the way she lowered her
eyelids and looked on the ground; her voice, that musical voice, was a
continual caress; her words expressed a constant thought; she was always
like unto herself; she did not halve her soul to suit two atmospheres,
one ardent, the other icy. In short, Madame de Mortsauf reserved her
mind and the flower of her thought to express her feelings; she was
coquettish in ideas with her children and with me. But Arabella’s mind
was never used to make life pleasant; it was never used at all for my
benefit; it existed only for the world and by the world, and it was
spent in sarcasm. She loved to rend, to bite, as it were,--not for
amusement but to satisfy a craving. Madame de Mortsauf would have hidden
her happiness from every eye, Lady Dudley chose to exhibit hers to
all Paris; and yet with her impenetrable English mask she kept within
conventions even while parading in the Bois with me. This mixture of
ostentation and dignity, love and coldness, wounded me constantly; for
my soul was both virgin and passionate, and as I could not pass from one
temperature to the other, my temper suffered. When I complained (never
without precaution), she turned her tongue with its triple sting against
me; mingling boasts of her love with those cutting English sarcasms. As
soon as she found herself in opposition to me, she made it an amusement
to hurt my feelings and humiliate my mind; she kneaded me like dough. To
any remark of mine as to keeping a medium in all things, she replied by
caricaturing my ideas and exaggerating them. When I reproached her for
her manner to me, she asked if I wished her to kiss me at the opera
before all Paris; and she said it so seriously that I, knowing her
desire to make people talk, trembled lest she should execute her threat.
In spite of her real passion she was never meditative, self-contained,
or reverent, like Henriette; on the contrary she was insatiable as a
sandy soil. Madame de Mortsauf was always composed, able to feel my soul
in an accent or a glance. Lady Dudley was never affected by a look, or
a pressure of the hand, nor yet by a tender word. No proof of love
surprised her. She felt so strong a necessity for excitement, noise,
celebrity, that nothing attained to her ideal in this respect; hence her
violent love, her exaggerated fancy,--everything concerned herself and
not me.

The letter you have read from Madame de Mortsauf (a light which still
shone brightly on my life), a proof of how the most virtuous of women
obeyed the genius of a Frenchwoman, revealing, as it did, her perpetual
vigilance, her sound understanding of all my prospects--that letter
must have made you see with what care Henriette had studied my material
interests, my political relations, my moral conquests, and with what
ardor she took hold of my life in all permissible directions. On
such points as these Lady Dudley affected the reticence of a mere
acquaintance. She never informed herself about my affairs, nor of my
likings or dislikings as a man. Prodigal for herself without being
generous, she separated too decidedly self-interest and love. Whereas
I knew very well, without proving it, that to save me a pang Henriette
would have sought for me that which she would never seek for herself. In
any great and overwhelming misfortune I should have gone for counsel to
Henriette, but I would have let myself be dragged to prison sooner than
say a word to Lady Dudley.

Up to this point the contrast relates to feelings; but it was the same
in outward things. In France, luxury is the expression of the man,
the reproduction of his ideas, of his personal poetry; it portrays the
character, and gives, between lovers, a precious value to every little
attention by keeping before them the dominant thought of the being
loved. But English luxury, which at first allured me by its choiceness
and delicacy, proved to be mechanical also. The thousand and one
attentions shown me at Clochegourde Arabella would have considered the
business of servants; each one had his own duty and speciality. The
choice of the footman was the business of her butler, as if it were a
matter of horses. She never attached herself to her servants; the death
of the best of them would not have affected her, for money could replace
the one lost by another equally efficient. As to her duty towards her
neighbor, I never saw a tear in her eye for the misfortunes of another;
in fact her selfishness was so naively candid that it absolutely created
a laugh. The crimson draperies of the great lady covered an iron nature.
The delightful siren who sounded at night every bell of her amorous
folly could soon make a young man forget the hard and unfeeling
Englishwoman, and it was only step by step that I discovered the stony
rock on which my seeds were wasted, bringing no harvest. Madame
de Mortsauf had penetrated that nature at a glance in their brief
encounter. I remembered her prophetic words. She was right; Arabella’s
love became intolerable to me. I have since remarked that most women who
ride well on horseback have little tenderness. Like the Amazons, they
lack a breast; their hearts are hard in some direction, but I do not
know in which.

At the moment when I begin to feel the burden of the yoke, when
weariness took possession of soul and body too, when at last I
comprehended the sanctity that true feeling imparts to love, when
memories of Clochegourde were bringing me, in spite of distance, the
fragrance of the roses, the warmth of the terrace, and the warble of
the nightingales,--at this frightful moment, when I saw the stony bed
beneath me as the waters of the torrent receded, I received a blow which
still resounds in my heart, for at every hour its echo wakes.

I was working in the cabinet of the king, who was to drive out at four
o’clock. The Duc de Lenoncourt was on service. When he entered the room
the king asked him news of the countess. I raised my head hastily in too
eager a manner; the king, offended by the action, gave me the look which
always preceded the harsh words he knew so well how to say.

“Sire, my poor daughter is dying,” replied the duke.

“Will the king deign to grant me leave of absence?” I cried, with tears
in my eyes, braving the anger which I saw about to burst.

“Go, _my lord_,” he answered, smiling at the satire in his words, and
withholding his reprimand in favor of his own wit.

More courtier than father, the duke asked no leave but got into the
carriage with the king. I started without bidding Lady Dudley good-bye;
she was fortunately out when I made my preparations, and I left a note
telling her I was sent on a mission by the king. At the Croix de Berny I
met his Majesty returning from Verrieres. He threw me a look full of his
royal irony, always insufferable in meaning, which seemed to say: “If
you mean to be anything in politics come back; don’t parley with the
dead.” The duke waved his hand to me sadly. The two pompous equipages
with their eight horses, the colonels and their gold lace, the escort
and the clouds of dust rolled rapidly away, to cries of “Vive le Roi!”
 It seemed to me that the court had driven over the dead body of Madame
de Mortsauf with the utter insensibility which nature shows for our
catastrophes. Though the duke was an excellent man he would no doubt
play whist with Monsieur after the king had retired. As for the duchess,
she had long ago given her daughter the first stab by writing to her of
Lady Dudley.

My hurried journey was like a dream,--the dream of a ruined gambler;
I was in despair at having received no news. Had the confessor
pushed austerity so far as to exclude me from Clochegourde? I accused
Madeleine, Jacques, the Abbe Dominis, all, even Monsieur de Mortsauf.
Beyond Tours, as I came down the road bordered with poplars which leads
to Poncher, which I so much admired that first day of my search for
mine Unknown, I met Monsieur Origet. He guessed that I was going to
Clochegourde; I guessed that he was returning. We stopped our carriages
and got out, I to ask for news, he to give it.

“How is Madame de Mortsauf?” I said.

“I doubt if you find her living,” he replied. “She is dying a frightful
death--of inanition. When she called me in, last June, no medical
power could control the disease; she had the symptoms which Monsieur
de Mortsauf has no doubt described to you, for he thinks he has them
himself. Madame la comtesse was not in any transient condition of
ill-health, which our profession can direct and which is often the cause
of a better state, nor was she in the crisis of a disorder the effects
of which can be repaired; no, her disease had reached a point where
science is useless; it is the incurable result of grief, just as a
mortal wound is the result of a stab. Her physical condition is produced
by the inertia of an organ as necessary to life as the action of
the heart itself. Grief has done the work of a dagger. Don’t deceive
yourself; Madame de Mortsauf is dying of some hidden grief.”

“Hidden!” I exclaimed. “Her children have not been ill?”

“No,” he said, looking at me significantly, “and since she has been so
seriously attacked Monsieur de Mortsauf has ceased to torment her. I am
no longer needed; Monsieur Deslandes of Azay is all-sufficient; nothing
can be done; her sufferings are dreadful. Young, beautiful, and rich, to
die emaciated, shrunken with hunger--for she dies of hunger! During the
last forty days the stomach, being as it were closed up, has rejected
all nourishment, under whatever form we attempt to give it.”

Monsieur Origet pressed my hand with a gesture of respect.

“Courage, monsieur,” he said, lifting his eyes to heaven.

The words expressed his compassion for sufferings he thought shared;
he little suspected the poisoned arrow which they shot into my heart.
I sprang into the carriage and ordered the postilion to drive on,
promising a good reward if I arrived in time.

Notwithstanding my impatience I seemed to do the distance in a few
minutes, so absorbed was I in the bitter reflections that crowded upon
my soul. Dying of grief, yet her children were well? then she died
through me! My conscience uttered one of those arraignments which echo
throughout our lives and sometimes beyond them. What weakness, what
impotence in human justice, which avenges none but open deeds! Why shame
and death to the murderer who kills with a blow, who comes upon you
unawares in your sleep and makes it last eternally, who strikes without
warning and spares you a struggle? Why a happy life, an honored life,
to the murderer who drop by drop pours gall into the soul and saps the
body to destroy it? How many murderers go unpunished! What indulgence for
fashionable vice! What condoning of the homicides caused by moral
wrongs! I know not whose avenging hand it was that suddenly, at that
moment, raised the painted curtain that reveals society. I saw before
me many victims known to you and me,--Madame de Beauseant, dying, and
starting for Normandy only a few days earlier; the Duchesse de Langeais
lost; Lady Brandon hiding herself in Touraine in the little house where
Lady Dudley had stayed two weeks, and dying there, killed by a frightful
catastrophe,--you know it. Our period teems with such events. Who does
not remember that poor young woman who poisoned herself, overcome by
jealousy, which was perhaps killing Madame de Mortsauf? Who has not
shuddered at the fate of that enchanting young girl who perished after
two years of marriage, like a flower torn by the wind, the victim of
her chaste ignorance, the victim of a villain with whom Ronquerolles,
Montriveau, and de Marsay shake hands because he is useful to their
political projects? What heart has failed to throb at the recital of the
last hours of the woman whom no entreaties could soften, and who would
never see her husband after nobly paying his debts? Madame d’Aiglemont
saw death beside her and was saved only by my brother’s care. Society
and science are accomplices in crimes for which there are no assizes.
The world declares that no one dies of grief, or of despair; nor yet of
love, of anguish hidden, of hopes cultivated yet fruitless, again and
again replanted yet forever uprooted. Our new scientific nomenclature
has plenty of words to explain these things; gastritis, pericarditis,
all the thousand maladies of women the names of which are whispered in
the ear, all serve as passports to the coffin followed by hypocritical
tears that are soon wiped by the hand of a notary. Can there be at
the bottom of this great evil some law which we do not know? Must the
centenary pitilessly strew the earth with corpses and dry them to dust
about him that he may raise himself, as the millionaire battens on a
myriad of little industries? Is there some powerful and venomous life
which feasts on these gentle, tender creatures? My God! do I belong to
the race of tigers?

Remorse gripped my heart in its scorching fingers, and my cheeks were
furrowed with tears as I entered the avenue of Clochegourde on a damp
October morning, which loosened the dead leaves of the poplars planted
by Henriette in the path where once she stood and waved her handkerchief
as if to recall me. Was she living? Why did I feel her two white hands
upon my head laid prostrate in the dust? In that moment I paid for all
the pleasures that Arabella had given me, and I knew that I paid dearly.
I swore not to see her again, and a hatred of England took possession of
me. Though Lady Dudley was only a variety of her species, I included all
Englishwomen in my judgment.

I received a fresh shock as I neared Clochegourde. Jacques, Madeleine,
and the Abbe Dominis were kneeling at the foot of a wooden cross placed
on a piece of ground that was taken into the enclosure when the iron
gate was put up, which the count and countess had never been willing
to remove. I sprang from the carriage and went towards them, my heart
aching at the sight of these children and that grave old man imploring
the mercy of God. The old huntsman was there too, with bared head,
standing a little apart.

I stooped to kiss Jacques and Madeleine, who gave me a cold look and
continued praying. The abbe rose from his knees; I took him by the arm
to support myself, saying, “Is she still alive?” He bowed his head
sadly and gently. “Tell me, I implore you for Christ’s sake, why are you
praying at the foot of this cross? Why are you here, and not with her?
Why are the children kneeling here this chilly morning? Tell me all,
that I may do no harm through ignorance.”

“For the last few days Madame le comtesse has been unwilling to see her
children except at stated times.--Monsieur,” he continued after a
pause, “perhaps you had better wait a few hours before seeing Madame
de Mortsauf; she is greatly changed. It is necessary to prepare her for
this interview, or it might cause an increase in her sufferings--death
would be a blessed release from them.”

I wrung the hand of the good man, whose look and voice soothed the pangs
of others without sharpening them.

“We are praying God to help her,” he continued; “for she, so saintly, so
resigned, so fit to die, has shown during the last few weeks a horror of
death; for the first time in her life she looks at others who are full
of health with gloomy, envious eyes. This aberration comes less, I
think, from the fear of death than from some inward intoxication,--from
the flowers of her youth which ferment as they wither. Yes, an evil
angel is striving against heaven for that glorious soul. She is passing
through her struggle on the Mount of Olives; her tears bathe the white
roses of her crown as they fall, one by one, from the head of this
wedded Jephtha. Wait; do not see her yet. You would bring to her the
atmosphere of the court; she would see in your face the reflection of
the things of life, and you would add to the bitterness of her regret.
Have pity on a weakness which God Himself forgave to His Son when He
took our nature upon Him. What merit would there be in conquering if we
had no adversary? Permit her confessor or me, two old men whose worn-out
lives cause her no pain, to prepare her for this unlooked-for meeting,
for emotions which the Abbe Birotteau has required her to renounce.
But, in the things of this world there is an invisible thread of divine
purpose which religion alone can see; and since you have come perhaps
you are led by some celestial star of the moral world which leads to the
tomb as to the manger--”

He then told me, with that tempered eloquence which falls like dew upon
the heart, that for the last six months the countess had suffered daily
more and more, in spite of Monsieur Origet’s care. The doctor had come
to Clochegourde every evening for two months, striving to rescue her
from death; for her one cry had been, “Oh, save me!” “To heal the body
the heart must first be healed,” the doctor had exclaimed one day.

“As the illness increased, the words of this poor woman, once so gentle,
have grown bitter,” said the Abbe. “She calls on earth to keep her,
instead of asking God to take her; then she repents these murmurs
against the divine decree. Such alternations of feeling rend her heart
and make the struggle between body and soul most horrible. Often the
body triumphs. ‘You have cost me dear,’ she said one day to Jacques and
Madeleine; but in a moment, recalled to God by the look on my face, she
turned to Madeleine with these angelic words, ‘The happiness of others
is the joy of those who cannot themselves be happy,’--and the tone with
which she said them brought tears to my eyes. She falls, it is true, but
each time that her feet stumble she rises higher towards heaven.”

Struck by the tone of the successive intimations chance had sent me,
and which in this great concert of misfortunes were like a prelude of
mournful modulations to a funereal theme, the mighty cry of expiring
love, I cried out: “Surely you believe that this pure lily cut from
earth will flower in heaven?”

“You left her still a flower,” he answered, “but you will find her
consumed, purified by the forces of suffering, pure as a diamond buried
in the ashes. Yes, that shining soul, angelic star, will issue glorious
from the clouds and pass into the kingdom of the Light.”

As I pressed the hand of the good evangelist, my heart overflowing with
gratitude, the count put his head, now entirely white, out of the door
and immediately sprang towards me with signs of surprise.

“She was right! He is here! ‘Felix, Felix, Felix has come!’ she kept
crying. My dear friend,” he continued, beside himself with terror,
“death is here. Why did it not take a poor madman like me with one foot
in the grave?”

I walked towards the house summoning my courage, but on the threshold
of the long antechamber which crossed the house and led to the lawn, the
Abbe Birotteau stopped me.

“Madame la comtesse begs you will not enter at present,” he said to me.

Giving a glance within the house I saw the servants coming and going,
all busy, all dumb with grief, surprised perhaps by the orders Manette
gave them.

“What has happened?” cried the count, alarmed by the commotion, as much
from fear of the coming event as from the natural uneasiness of his
character.

“Only a sick woman’s fancy,” said the abbe. “Madame la comtesse does
not wish to receive monsieur le vicomte as she now is. She talks of
dressing; why thwart her?”

Manette came in search of Madeleine, whom I saw leave the house a few
moments after she had entered her mother’s room. We were all, Jacques
and his father, the two abbes and I, silently walking up and down the
lawn in front of the house. I looked first at Montbazon and then at
Azay, noticing the seared and yellow valley which answered in its
mourning (as it ever did on all occasions) to the feelings of my heart.
Suddenly I beheld the dear “mignonne” gathering the autumn flowers, no
doubt to make a bouquet at her mother’s bidding. Thinking of all which
that signified, I was so convulsed within me that I staggered, my sight
was blurred, and the two abbes, between whom I walked, led me to the
wall of a terrace, where I sat for some time completely broken down but
not unconscious.

“Poor Felix,” said the count, “she forbade me to write to you. She knew
how much you loved her.”

Though prepared to suffer, I found I had no strength to bear a scene
which recalled my memories of past happiness. “Ah!” I thought, “I see
it still, that barren moor, dried like a skeleton, lit by a gray sky, in
the centre of which grew a single flowering bush, which again and again
I looked at with a shudder,--the forecast of this mournful hour!”

All was gloom in the little castle, once so animated, so full of life.
The servants were weeping; despair and desolation everywhere. The paths
were not raked, work was begun and left undone, the workmen standing
idly about the house. Though the grapes were being gathered in the
vineyard, not a sound reached us. The place seemed uninhabited, so deep
the silence! We walked about like men whose grief rejects all ordinary
topics, and we listened to the count, the only one of us who spoke.

After a few words prompted by the mechanical love he felt for his wife
he was led by the natural bent of his mind to complain of her. She had
never, he said, taken care of herself or listened to him when he gave
her good advice. He had been the first to notice the symptoms of her
illness, for he had studied them in his own case; he had fought them and
cured them without other assistance than careful diet and the avoidance
of all emotion. He could have cured the countess, but a husband ought
not to take so much responsibility upon himself, especially when he
has the misfortune of finding his experience, in this as in everything,
despised. In spite of all he could say, the countess insisted on seeing
Origet,--Origet, who had managed his case so ill, was now killing his
wife. If this disease was, as they said, the result of excessive grief,
surely he was the one who had been in a condition to have it. What
griefs could the countess have had? She was always happy; she had never
had troubles or annoyances. Their fortune, thanks to his care and to his
sound ideas, was now in a most satisfactory state; he had always allowed
Madame de Mortsauf to reign at Clochegourde; her children, well trained
and now in health, gave her no anxiety,--where, then, did this grief
they talked of come from?

Thus he argued and discussed the matter, mingling his expressions of
despair with senseless accusations. Then, recalled by some sudden memory
to the admiration which he felt for his wife, tears rolled from his eyes
which had been dry so long.

Madeleine came to tell me that her mother was ready. The Abbe Birotteau
followed me. Madeleine, now a grave young girl, stayed with her father,
saying that the countess desired to be alone with me, and also that the
presence of too many persons would fatigue her. The solemnity of
this moment gave me that sense of inward heat and outward cold which
overcomes us often in the great events of life. The Abbe Birotteau, one
of those men whom God marks for his own by investing them with sweetness
and simplicity, together with patience and compassion, took me aside.

“Monsieur,” he said, “I wish you to know that I have done all in my
power to prevent this meeting. The salvation of this saint required it.
I have considered her only, and not you. Now that you are about to see
her to whom access ought to have been denied you by the angels, let me
say that I shall be present to protect you against yourself and perhaps
against her. Respect her weakness. I do not ask this of you as a priest,
but as a humble friend whom you did not know you had, and who would fain
save you from remorse. Our dear patient is dying of hunger and thirst.
Since morning she is a victim to the feverish irritation which precedes
that horrible death, and I cannot conceal from you how deeply she
regrets life. The cries of her rebellious flesh are stifled in my
heart--where they wake echoes of a wound still tender. But Monsieur de
Dominis and I accept this duty that we may spare the sight of this moral
anguish to her family; as it is, they no longer recognize their star by
night and by day in her; they all, husband, children, servants, all
are asking, ‘Where is she?’--she is so changed! When she sees you, her
regrets will revive. Lay aside your thoughts as a man of the world,
forget its vanities, be to her the auxiliary of heaven, not of earth.
Pray God that this dear saint die not in a moment of doubt, giving voice
to her despair.”

I did not answer. My silence alarmed the poor confessor. I saw, I heard,
I walked, and yet I was no longer on the earth. The thought, “In what
state shall I find her? Why do they use these precautions?” gave rise to
apprehensions which were the more cruel because so indefinite; all forms
of suffering crowded my mind.

We reached the door of the chamber and the abbe opened it. I then saw
Henriette, dressed in white, sitting on her little sofa which was placed
before the fireplace, on which were two vases filled with flowers;
flowers were also on a table near the window. The expression of the
abbe’s face, which was that of amazement at the change in the room, now
restored to its former state, showing me that the dying woman had sent
away the repulsive preparations which surround a sick-bed. She had spent
the last waning strength of fever in decorating her room to receive him
whom in that final hour she loved above all things else. Surrounded by
clouds of lace, her shrunken face, which had the greenish pallor of a
magnolia flower as it opens, resembled the first outline of a cherished
head drawn in chalks upon the yellow canvas of a portrait. To feel how
deeply the vulture’s talons now buried themselves in my heart, imagine
the eyes of that outlined face finished and full of life,--hollow
eyes which shone with a brilliancy unusual in a dying person. The calm
majesty given to her in the past by her constant victory over sorrow
was there no longer. Her forehead, the only part of her face which still
kept its beautiful proportions, wore an expression of aggressive will
and covert threats. In spite of the waxy texture of her elongated face,
inward fires were issuing from it like the fluid mist which seems to
flame above the fields of a hot day. Her hollow temples, her sunken
cheeks showed the interior formation of the face, and the smile upon her
whitened lips vaguely resembled the grin of death. Her robe, which was
folded across her breast, showed the emaciation of her beautiful figure.
The expression of her head said plainly that she knew she was changed,
and that the thought filled her with bitterness. She was no longer the
arch Henriette, nor the sublime and saintly Madame de Mortsauf, but the
nameless something of Bossuet struggling against annihilation, driven to
the selfish battle of life against death by hunger and balked desire. I
took her hand, which was dry and burning, to kiss it, as I seated myself
beside her. She guessed my sorrowful surprise from the very effort that
I made to hide it. Her discolored lips drew up from her famished teeth
trying to form a smile,--the forced smile with which we strive to
hide either the irony of vengeance, the expectation of pleasure, the
intoxication of our souls, or the fury of disappointment.

“Ah, my poor Felix, this is death,” she said, “and you do not like
death; odious death, of which every human creature, even the boldest
lover, feels a horror. This is the end of love; I knew it would be so.
Lady Dudley will never see you thus surprised at the change in her. Ah!
why have I so longed for you, Felix? You have come at last, and I reward
your devotion by the same horrible sight that made the Comte de Rance
a Trappist. I, who hoped to remain ever beautiful and noble in your
memory, to live there eternally a lily, I it is who destroy your
illusions! True love cannot calculate. But stay; do not go, stay.
Monsieur Origet said I was much better this morning; I shall recover.
Your looks will bring me back to life. When I regain a little strength,
when I can take some nourishment, I shall be beautiful again. I
am scarcely thirty-five, there are many years of happiness before
me,--happiness renews our youth; yes, I must know happiness! I have made
delightful plans,--we will leave Clochegourde and go to Italy.”

Tears filled my eyes and I turned to the window as if to look at the
flowers. The abbe followed me hastily, and bending over the bouquet
whispered, “No tears!”

“Henriette, do you no longer care for our dear valley,” I said, as if to
explain my sudden movement.

“Oh, yes!” she said, turning her forehead to my lips with a fond motion.
“But without you it is fatal to me,--without _thee_,” she added, putting
her burning lips to my ear and whispering the words like a sigh.

I was horror-struck at the wild caress, and my will was not strong
enough to repress the nervous agitation I felt throughout this scene. I
listened without reply; or rather I replied by a fixed smile and signs
of comprehension; wishing not to thwart her, but to treat her as a
mother does a child. Struck at first with the change in her person, I
now perceived that the woman, once so dignified in her bearing, showed
in her attitude, her voice, her manners, in her looks and her ideas, the
naive ignorance of a child, its artless graces, its eager movements,
its careless indifference to everything that is not its own desire,--in
short all the weaknesses which commend a child to our protection. Is it
so with all dying persons? Do they strip off social disguises till
they are like children who have never put them on? Or was it that the
countess feeling herself on the borders of eternity, rejected every
human feeling except love?

“You will bring me health as you used to do, Felix,” she said, “and our
valley will still be my blessing. How can I help eating what you will
give me? You are such a good nurse. Besides, you are so rich in health
and vigor that life is contagious beside you. My friend, prove to me
that I need not die--die blighted. They think my worst suffering is
thirst. Oh, yes, my thirst is great, dear friend. The waters of the
Indre are terrible to see; but the thirst of my heart is greater far.
I thirsted for thee,” she said in a smothered voice, taking my hands in
hers, which were burning, and drawing me close that she might whisper
in my ear. “My anguish has been in not seeing thee! Did you not bid
me live? I will live; I too will ride on horseback; I will know life,
Paris, fetes, pleasures, all!”

Ah! Natalie, that awful cry--which time and distance render cold--rang
in the ears of the old priest and in mine; the tones of that glorious
voice pictured the battles of a lifetime, the anguish of a true love
lost. The countess rose with an impatient movement like that of a child
which seeks a plaything. When the confessor saw her thus the poor man
fell upon his knees and prayed with clasped hands.

“Yes, to live!” she said, making me rise and support her; “to live with
realities and not with delusions. All has been delusions in my life; I
have counted them up, these lies, these impostures! How can I die, I
who have never lived? I who have never roamed a moor to meet him!” She
stopped, seemed to listen, and to smell some odor through the walls.
“Felix, the vintagers are dining, and I, I,” she said, in the voice of
a child, “I, the mistress, am hungry. It is so in love,--they are happy,
they, they!--”

“Kyrie eleison!” said the poor abbe, who with clasped hands and eyes
raised to heaven was reciting his litanies.

She flung an arm around my neck, kissed me violently, and pressed me to
her, saying, “You shall not escape me now!” She gave the little nod with
which in former days she used, when leaving me for an instant, to say
she would return. “We will dine together,” she said; “I will go and tell
Manette.” She turned to go, but fainted; and I laid her, dressed as she
was, upon the bed.

“You carried me thus before,” she murmured, opening her eyes.

She was very light, but burning; as I took her in my arms I felt the
heat of her body. Monsieur Deslandes entered and seemed surprised at the
decoration of the room; but seeing me, all was explained to him.

“We must suffer much to die,” she said in a changed voice.

The doctor sat down and felt her pulse, then he rose quickly and said a
few words in a low voice to the priest, who left the room beckoning me
to follow him.

“What are you going to do?” I said to the doctor.

“Save her from intolerable agony,” he replied. “Who could have believed
in so much strength? We cannot understand how she can have lived in this
state so long. This is the forty-second day since she has either eaten
or drunk.”

Monsieur Deslandes called for Manette. The Abbe Birotteau took me to the
gardens.

“Let us leave her to the doctor,” he said; “with Manette’s help he will
wrap her in opium. Well, you have heard her now--if indeed it is she
herself.”

“No,” I said, “it is not she.”

I was stupefied with grief. I left the grounds by the little gate of the
lower terrace and went to the punt, in which I hid to be alone with my
thoughts. I tried to detach myself from the being in which I lived,--a
torture like that with which the Tartars punish adultery by fastening a
limb of the guilty man in a piece of wood and leaving him with a knife
to cut it off if he would not die of hunger. My life was a failure, too!
Despair suggested many strange ideas to me. Sometimes I vowed to die
beside her; sometimes to bury myself at Meilleraye among the Trappists.
I looked at the windows of the room where Henriette was dying, fancying
I saw the light that was burning there the night I betrothed my soul to
hers. Ah! ought I not to have followed the simple life she had created
for me, keeping myself faithfully to her while I worked in the world?
Had she not bidden me become a great man expressly that I might be
saved from base and shameful passions? Chastity! was it not a sublime
distinction which I had not know how to keep? Love, as Arabella
understood it, suddenly disgusted me. As I raised my humbled head asking
myself where, in future, I could look for light and hope, what interest
could hold me to life, the air was stirred by a sudden noise. I turned
to the terrace and there saw Madeleine walking alone, with slow steps.
During the time it took me to ascend the terrace, intending to ask the
dear child the reason of the cold look she had given me when kneeling at
the foot of the cross, she had seated herself on the bench. When she saw
me approach her, she rose, pretending not to have seen me, and returned
towards the house in a significantly hasty manner. She hated me; she
fled from her mother’s murderer.

When I reached the portico I saw Madeleine like a statue, motionless and
erect, evidently listening to the sound of my steps. Jacques was sitting
in the portico. His attitude expressed the same insensibility to what
was going on about him that I had noticed when I first saw him; it
suggested ideas such as we lay aside in some corner of our mind to take
up and study at our leisure. I have remarked that young persons who
carry death within them are usually unmoved at funerals. I longed to
question that gloomy spirit. Had Madeleine kept her thoughts to herself,
or had she inspired Jacques with her hatred?

“You know, Jacques,” I said, to begin the conversation, “that in me you
have a most devoted brother.”

“Your friendship is useless to me; I shall follow my mother,” he said,
giving me a sullen look of pain.

“Jacques!” I cried, “you, too, against me?”

He coughed and walked away; when he returned he showed me his
handkerchief stained with blood.

“Do you understand that?” he said.

Thus they had each of them a fatal secret. I saw before long that the
brother and sister avoided each other. Henriette laid low, all was in
ruins at Clochegourde.

“Madame is asleep,” Manette came to say, quite happy in knowing that the
countess was out of pain.

In these dreadful moments, though each person knows the inevitable end,
strong affections fasten on such minor joys. Minutes are centuries which
we long to make restorative; we wish our dear ones to lie on roses,
we pray to bear their sufferings, we cling to the hope that their last
moment may be to them unexpected.

“Monsieur Deslandes has ordered the flowers taken away; they excited
Madame’s nerves,” said Manette.

Then it was the flowers that caused her delirium; she herself was not a
part of it.

“Come, Monsieur Felix,” added Manette, “come and see Madame; she is
beautiful as an angel.”

I returned to the dying woman just as the setting sun was gilding the
lace-work on the roofs of the chateau of Azay. All was calm and pure.
A soft light lit the bed on which my Henriette was lying, wrapped in
opium. The body was, as it were, annihilated; the soul alone reigned
on that face, serene as the skies when the tempest is over. Blanche and
Henriette, two sublime faces of the same woman, reappeared; all the more
beautiful because my recollection, my thought, my imagination, aiding
nature, repaired the devastation of each dear feature, where now the
soul triumphant sent its gleams through the calm pulsations of her
breathing. The two abbes were sitting at the foot of the bed. The count
stood, as though stupefied by the banners of death which floated above
that adored being. I took her seat on the sofa. We all four turned to
each other looks in which admiration for that celestial beauty mingled
with tears of mourning. The lights of thought announced the return of
the Divine Spirit to that glorious tabernacle.

The Abbe Dominis and I spoke in signs, communicating to each other our
mutual ideas. Yes, the angels were watching her! yes, their flaming
swords shone above that noble brow, which the august expression of her
virtue made, as it were, a visible soul conversing with the spirits of
its sphere. The lines of her face cleared; all in her was exalted and
became majestic beneath the unseen incense of the seraphs who guarded
her. The green tints of bodily suffering gave place to pure white tones,
the cold wan pallor of approaching death. Jacques and Madeleine entered.
Madeleine made us quiver by the adoring impulse which flung her on her
knees beside the bed, crying out, with clasped hand: “My mother! here is
my mother!” Jacques smiled; he knew he would follow her where she went.

“She is entering the haven,” said the Abbe Birotteau.

The Abbe Dominis looked at me as if to say: “Did I not tell you the star
would rise in all its glory?”

Madeleine knelt with her eyes fixed on her mother, breathing when she
breathed, listening to the soft breath, the last thread by which she
held to life, and which we followed in terror, fearing that every effort
of respiration might be the last. Like an angel at the gates of the
sanctuary, the young girl was eager yet calm, strong but reverent. At
that moment the Angelus rang from the village clock-tower. Waves of
tempered air brought its reverberations to remind us that this was the
sacred hour when Christianity repeats the words said by the angel to the
woman who has redeemed the faults of her sex. “Ave Maria!”--surely, at
this moment the words were a salutation from heaven. The prophecy was so
plain, the event so near that we burst into tears. The murmuring sounds
of evening, melodious breezes in the leafage, last warbling of the
birds, the hum and echo of the insects, the voices of the waters,
the plaintive cry of the tree-frog,--all country things were bidding
farewell to the loveliest lily of the valley, to her simple, rural life.
The religious poesy of the hour, now added to that of Nature, expressed
so vividly the psalm of the departing soul that our sobs redoubled.

Though the door of the chamber was open we were all so plunged in
contemplation of the scene, as if to imprint its memories forever on our
souls, that we did not notice the family servants who were kneeling as
a group and praying fervently. These poor people, living on hope, had
believed their mistress might be spared, and this plain warning overcame
them. At a sign from the Abbe Birotteau the old huntsman went to fetch
the curate of Sache. The doctor, standing by the bed, calm as science,
and holding the hand of the still sleeping woman, had made the confessor
a sign to say that this sleep was the only hour without pain which
remained for the recalled angel. The moment had come to administer the
last sacraments of the Church. At nine o’clock she awoke quietly, looked
at us with surprised but gentle eyes, and we beheld our idol once more
in all the beauty of former days.

“Mother! you are too beautiful to die--life and health are coming back
to you!” cried Madeleine.

“Dear daughter, I shall live--in thee,” she answered, smiling.

Then followed heart-rending embraces of the mother and her children.
Monsieur de Mortsauf kissed his wife upon her brow. She colored when she
saw me.

“Dear Felix,” she said, “this is, I think, the only grief that I shall
ever have caused you. Forget all that I may have said,--I, a poor
creature much beside myself.” She held out her hand; I took it and
kissed it. Then she said, with her chaste and gracious smile, “As in the
old days, Felix?”

We all left the room and went into the salon during the last confession.
I approached Madeleine. In presence of others she could not escape me
without a breach of civility; but, like her mother, she looked at
no one, and kept silence without even once turning her eyes in my
direction.

“Dear Madeleine,” I said in a low voice, “What have you against me?
Why do you show such coldness in the presence of death, which ought to
reconcile us all?”

“I hear in my heart what my mother is saying at this moment,” she
replied, with a look which Ingres gave to his “Mother of God,”--that
virgin, already sorrowful, preparing herself to protect the world for
which her son was about to die.

“And you condemn me at the moment when your mother absolves me,--if
indeed I am guilty.”

“You, _you_,” she said, “always _your self_!”

The tones of her voice revealed the determined hatred of a Corsican,
implacable as the judgments of those who, not having studied life, admit
of no extenuation of faults committed against the laws of the heart.

An hour went by in deepest silence. The Abbe Birotteau came to us after
receiving the countess’s general confession, and we followed him back to
the room where Henriette, under one of those impulses which often come
to noble minds, all sisters of one intent, had made them dress her in
the long white garment which was to be her shroud. We found her sitting
up; beautiful from expiation, beautiful in hope. I saw in the fireplace
the black ashes of my letters which had just been burned, a sacrifice
which, as her confessor afterwards told me, she had not been willing to
make until the hour of her death. She smiled upon us all with the smile
of other days. Her eyes, moist with tears, gave evidence of inward
lucidity; she saw the celestial joys of the promised land.

“Dear Felix,” she said, holding out her hand and pressing mine, “stay
with us. You must be present at the last scene of my life, not the least
painful among many such, but one in which you are concerned.”

She made a sign and the door was closed. At her request the count sat
down; the Abbe Birotteau and I remained standing. Then with Manette’s
help the countess rose and knelt before the astonished count, persisting
in remaining there. A moment after, when Manette had left the room, she
raised her head which she had laid upon her husband’s knees.

“Though I have been a faithful wife to you,” she said, in a faint voice,
“I have sometimes failed in my duty. I have just prayed to God to give
me strength to ask your pardon. I have given to a friendship outside
of my family more affectionate care than I have shown to you. Perhaps
I have sometimes irritated you by the comparisons you may have made
between these cares, these thoughts, and those I gave to you. I have
had,” she said, in a sinking voice, “a deep friendship, which no one,
not even he who has been its object, has fully known. Though I have
continued virtuous according to all human laws, though I have been
a irreproachable wife to you, still other thoughts, voluntary or
involuntary, have often crossed my mind and, in this hour, I fear I
have welcomed them too warmly. But as I have tenderly loved you, and
continued to be your submissive wife, and as the clouds passing beneath
the sky do not alter its purity, I now pray for your blessing with a
clean heart. I shall die without one bitter thought if I can hear
from your lips a tender word for your Blanche, for the mother of your
children,--if I know that you forgive her those things for which she did
not forgive herself till reassured by the great tribunal which pardons
all.”

“Blanche, Blanche!” cried the broken man, shedding tears upon his wife’s
head, “Would you kill me?” He raised her with a strength unusual to him,
kissed her solemnly on the forehead, and thus holding her continued:
“Have I no forgiveness to ask of you? Have I never been harsh? Are you
not making too much of your girlish scruples?”

“Perhaps,” she said. “But, dear friend, indulge the weakness of a dying
woman; tranquillize my mind. When you reach this hour you will remember
that I left you with a blessing. Will you grant me permission to leave
to our friend now here that pledge of my affection?” she continued,
showing a letter that was on the mantelshelf. “He is now my adopted son,
and that is all. The heart, dear friend, makes its bequests; my last
wishes impose a sacred duty on that dear Felix. I think I do not put
too great a burden on him; grant that I do not ask too much of you in
desiring to leave him these last words. You see, I am always a woman,”
 she said, bending her head with mournful sweetness; “after obtaining
pardon I ask a gift--Read this,” she added, giving me the letter; “but
not until after my death.”

The count saw her color change: he lifted her and carried her himself to
the bed, where we all surrounded her.

“Felix,” she said, “I may have done something wrong to you. Often I gave
you pain by letting you hope for that I could not give you; but see,
it was that very courage of wife and mother that now enables me to die
forgiven of all. You will forgive me too; you who have so often blamed
me, and whose injustice was so dear--”

The Abbe Birotteau laid a finger on his lips. At that sign the dying
woman bowed her head, faintness overcame her; presently she waved her
hands as if summoning the clergy and her children and the servants to
her presence, and then, with an imploring gesture, she showed me the
desolate count and the children beside him. The sight of that father,
the secret of whose insanity was known to us alone, now to be left sole
guardian of those delicate beings, brought mute entreaties to her face,
which fell upon my heart like sacred fire. Before receiving extreme
unction she asked pardon of her servants if by a hasty word she had
sometimes hurt them; she asked their prayers and commended each one,
individually, to the count; she nobly confessed that during the last two
months she had uttered complaints that were not Christian and might
have shocked them; she had repulsed her children and clung to life
unworthily; but she attributed this failure of submission to the will
of God to her intolerable sufferings. Finally, she publicly thanked the
Abbe Birotteau with heartfelt warmth for having shown her the illusion
of all earthly things.

When she ceased to speak, prayers were said again, and the curate of
Sache gave her the viaticum. A few moments later her breathing became
difficult; a film overspread her eyes, but soon they cleared again; she
gave me a last look and died to the eyes of earth, hearing perhaps the
symphony of our sobs. As her last sigh issued from her lips,--the effort
of a life that was one long anguish,--I felt a blow within me that
struck on all my faculties. The count and I remained beside the bier all
night with the two abbes and the curate, watching, in the glimmer of the
tapers, the body of the departed, now so calm, laid upon the mattress of
her bed, where once she had suffered cruelly. It was my first communion
with death. I remained the whole of that night with my eyes fixed
on Henriette, spell-bound by the pure expression that came from the
stilling of all tempests, by the whiteness of that face where still I
saw the traces of her innumerable affections, although it made no answer
to my love. What majesty in that silence, in that coldness! How many
thoughts they expressed! What beauty in that cold repose, what power in
that immobility! All the past was there and futurity had begun. Ah! I
loved her dead as much as I had loved her living. In the morning the
count went to bed; the three wearied priests fell asleep in that heavy
hour of dawn so well known to those who watch. I could then, without
witnesses, kiss that sacred brow with all the love I had never been
allowed to utter.

The third day, in a cool autumn morning, we followed the countess to her
last home. She was carried by the old huntsman, the two Martineaus, and
Manette’s husband. We went down by the road I had so joyously ascended
the day I first returned to her. We crossed the valley of the Indre to
the little cemetery of Sache--a poor village graveyard, placed behind
the church on the slope of the hill, where with true humility she had
asked to be buried beneath a simple cross of black wood, “like a poor
country-woman,” she said. When I saw, from the centre of the valley,
the village church and the place of the graveyard a convulsive shudder
seized me. Alas! we have all our Golgothas, where we leave the first
thirty-three years of our lives, with the lance-wound in our side, the
crown of thorns and not of roses on our brow--that hill-slope was to me
the mount of expiation.

We were followed by an immense crowd, seeking to express the grief of
the valley where she had silently buried so many noble actions. Manette,
her faithful woman, told me that when her savings did not suffice to
help the poor she economized upon her dress. There were babes to be
provided for, naked children to be clothed, mothers succored in their
need, sacks of flour brought to the millers in winter for helpless
old men, a cow sent to some poor home,--deeds of a Christian woman,
a mother, and the lady of the manor. Besides these things, there were
dowries paid to enable loving hearts to marry; substitutes bought for
youths to whom the draft had brought despair, tender offerings of the
loving woman who had said: “The happiness of others is the consolation
of those who cannot themselves be happy.” Such things, related at the
“veillees,” made the crowd immense. I walked with Jacques and the two
abbes behind the coffin. According to custom neither the count nor
Madeleine were present; they remained alone at Clochegourde. But Manette
insisted in coming with us. “Poor madame! poor madame! she is happy
now,” I heard her saying to herself amid her sobs.

As the procession left the road to the mills I heard a simultaneous moan
and a sound of weeping as though the valley were lamenting for its soul.
The church was filled with people. After the service was over we went to
the graveyard where she wished to be buried near the cross. When I heard
the pebbles and the gravel falling upon the coffin my courage gave way;
I staggered and asked the two Martineaus to steady me. They took me,
half-dead, to the chateau of Sache, where the owners very kindly invited
me to stay, and I accepted. I will own to you that I dreaded a return
to Clochegourde, and it was equally repugnant to me to go to Frapesle,
where I could see my Henriette’s windows. Here, at Sache, I was near
her. I lived for some days in a room which looked on the tranquil,
solitary valley I have mentioned to you. It is a deep recess among the
hills, bordered by oaks that are doubly centenarian, through which a
torrent rushes after rain. The scene was in keeping with the stern and
solemn meditations to which I desired to abandon myself.

I had perceived, during the day which followed the fatal night, how
unwelcome my presence might be at Clochegourde. The count had gone
through violent emotions at the death of his wife; but he had expected
the event; his mind was made up to it in a way that was something like
indifference. I had noticed this several times, and when the countess
gave me that letter (which I still dared not read) and when she spoke
of her affection for me, I remarked that the count, usually so quick
to take offence, made no sign of feeling any. He attributed Henriette’s
wording to the extreme sensitiveness of a conscience which he knew to be
pure. This selfish insensibility was natural to him. The souls of these
two beings were no more married than their bodies; they had never
had the intimate communion which keeps feeling alive; they had shared
neither pains nor pleasures, those strong links which tear us by a
thousand edges when broken, because they touch on all our fibers, and
are fastened to the inmost recesses of our hearts.

Another consideration forbade my return to Clochegourde,--Madeleine’s
hostility. That hard young girl was not disposed to modify her hatred
beside her mother’s coffin. Between the count, who would have talked to
me incessantly of himself, and the new mistress of the house, who would
have shown me invincible dislike, I should have found myself horribly
annoyed. To be treated thus where once the very flowers welcomed me,
where the steps of the portico had a voice, where my memory clothed with
poetry the balconies, the fountains, the balustrades, the trees, the
glimpses of the valleys! to be hated where I once was loved--the thought
was intolerable to me. So, from the first, my mind was made up.

Alas! alas! was this the end of the keenest love that ever entered
the heart of man? To the eyes of strangers my conduct might be
reprehensible, but it had the sanction of my own conscience. It is thus
that the noblest feelings, the sublimest dramas of our youth must end.
We start at dawn, as I from Tours to Clochegourde, we clutch the world,
our hearts hungry for love; then, when our treasure is in the crucible,
when we mingle with men and circumstances, all becomes gradually debased
and we find but little gold among the ashes. Such is life! life as it
is; great pretensions, small realities. I meditated long about myself,
debating what I could do after a blow like this which had mown down
every flower of my soul. I resolved to rush into the science of
politics, into the labyrinth of ambition, to cast woman from my life and
to make myself a statesman, cold and passionless, and so remain true to
the saint I loved. My thoughts wandered into far-off regions while my
eyes were fastened on the splendid tapestry of the yellowing oaks, the
stern summits, the bronzed foothills. I asked myself if Henriette’s
virtue were not, after all, that of ignorance, and if I were indeed
guilty of her death. I fought against remorse. At last, in the sweetness
of an autumn midday, one of those last smiles of heaven which are so
beautiful in Touraine, I read the letter which at her request I was not
to open before her death. Judge of my feelings as I read it.

  Madame de Mortsauf to the Vicomte Felix de Vandenesse:

  Felix, friend, loved too well, I must now lay bare my heart to
  you,--not so much to prove my love as to show you the weight of
  obligation you have incurred by the depth and gravity of the
  wounds you have inflicted on it. At this moment, when I sink
  exhausted by the toils of life, worn out by the shocks of its
  battle, the woman within me is, mercifully, dead; the mother alone
  survives. Dear, you are now to see how it was that you were the
  original cause of all my sufferings. Later, I willingly received
  your blows; to-day I am dying of the final wound your hand has
  given,--but there is joy, excessive joy in feeling myself
  destroyed by him I love.

  My physical sufferings will soon put an end to my mental strength;
  I therefore use the last clear gleams of intelligence to implore
  you to befriend my children and replace the heart of which you
  have deprived them. I would solemnly impose this duty upon you if
  I loved you less; but I prefer to let you choose it for yourself
  as an act of sacred repentance, and also in faithful continuance
  of your love--love, for us, was ever mingled with repentant
  thoughts and expiatory fears! but--I know it well--we shall
  forever love each other. Your wrong to me was not so fatal an act
  in itself as the power which I let it have within me. Did I not
  tell you I was jealous, jealous unto death? Well, I die of it.
  But, be comforted, we have kept all human laws. The Church has
  told me, by one of her purest voices, that God will be forgiving
  to those who subdue their natural desires to His commandments. My
  beloved, you are now to know all, for I would not leave you in
  ignorance of any thought of mine. What I confide to God in my last
  hour you, too, must know,--you, king of my heart as He is King of
  Heaven.

  Until the ball given to the Duc d’Angouleme (the only ball at
  which I was ever present), marriage had left me in that ignorance
  which gives to the soul of a young girl the beauty of the angels.
  True, I was a mother, but love had never surrounded me with its
  permitted pleasures. How did this happen? I do not know; neither
  do I know by what law everything within me changed in a moment.
  You remember your kisses? they have mastered my life, they have
  furrowed my soul; the ardor of your blood awoke the ardor of mine;
  your youth entered my youth, your desires my soul. When I rose and
  left you proudly I was filled with an emotion for which I know no
  name in any language--for children have not yet found a word to
  express the marriage of their eyes with light, nor the kiss of
  life laid upon their lips. Yes, it was sound coming in the echo,
  light flashing through the darkness, motion shaking the universe;
  at least, it was rapid like all these things, but far more
  beautiful, for it was the birth of the soul! I comprehended then
  that something, I knew not what, existed for me in the world,--a
  force nobler than thought; for it was all thoughts, all forces, it
  was the future itself in a shared emotion. I felt I was but half a
  mother. Falling thus upon my heart this thunderbolt awoke desires
  which slumbered there without my knowledge; suddenly I divined all
  that my aunt had meant when she kissed my forehead, murmuring,
  “Poor Henriette!”

  When I returned to Clochegourde, the springtime, the first leaves,
  the fragrance of the flowers, the white and fleecy clouds, the
  Indre, the sky, all spoke to me in a language till then unknown.
  If you have forgotten those terrible kisses, I have never been
  able to efface them from my memory,--I am dying of them! Yes, each
  time that I have met you since, their impress is revived. I was
  shaken from head to foot when I first saw you; the mere
  presentiment of your coming overcame me. Neither time nor my firm
  will has enabled me to conquer that imperious sense of pleasure. I
  asked myself involuntarily, “What must be such joys?” Our mutual
  looks, the respectful kisses you laid upon my hand, the pressure
  of my arm on yours, your voice with its tender tones,--all, even
  the slightest things, shook me so violently that clouds obscured
  my sight; the murmur of rebellious senses filled my ears. Ah! if
  in those moments when outwardly I increased my coldness you had
  taken me in your arms I should have died of happiness. Sometimes I
  desired it, but prayer subdued the evil thought. Your name uttered
  by my children filled my heart with warmer blood, which gave color
  to my cheeks; I laid snares for my poor Madeleine to induce her to
  say it, so much did I love the tumults of that sensation. Ah! what
  shall I say to you? Your writing had a charm; I gazed at your
  letters as we look at a portrait.

  If on that first day you obtained some fatal power over me,
  conceive, dear friend, how infinite that power became when it was
  given to me to read your soul. What delights filled me when I
  found you so pure, so absolutely truthful, gifted with noble
  qualities, capable of noblest things, and already so tried! Man
  and child, timid yet brave! What joy to find we both were
  consecrated by a common grief! Ever since that evening when we
  confided our childhoods to each other, I have known that to lose
  you would be death,--yes, I have kept you by me selfishly. The
  certainty felt by Monsieur de la Berge that I should die if I lost
  you touched him deeply, for he read my soul. He knew how necessary
  I was to my children and the count; he did not command me to
  forbid you my house, for I promised to continue pure in deed and
  thought. “Thought,” he said to me, “is involuntary, but it can be
  watched even in the midst of anguish.” “If I think,” I replied,
  “all will be lost; save me from myself. Let him remain beside me
  and keep me pure!” The good old man, though stern, was moved by my
  sincerity. “Love him as you would a son, and give him your
  daughter,” he said. I accepted bravely that life of suffering that
  I might not lose you, and I suffered joyfully, seeing that we were
  called to bear the same yoke--My God! I have been firm, faithful
  to my husband; I have given you no foothold, Felix, in your
  kingdom. The grandeur of my passion has reacted on my character; I
  have regarded the tortures Monsieur de Mortsauf has inflicted on
  me as expiations; I bore them proudly in condemnation of my faulty
  desires. Formerly I was disposed to murmur at my life, but since
  you entered it I have recovered some gaiety, and this has been the
  better for the count. Without this strength, which I derived
  through you, I should long since have succumbed to the inward life
  of which I told you.

  If you have counted for much in the exercise of my duty so have my
  children also. I felt I had deprived them of something, and I
  feared I could never do enough to make amends to them; my life was
  thus a continual struggle which I loved. Feeling that I was less a
  mother, less an honest wife, remorse entered my heart; fearing to
  fail in my obligations, I constantly went beyond them. Often have
  I put Madeleine between you and me, giving you to each other,
  raising barriers between us,--barriers that were powerless! for
  what could stifle the emotions which you caused me? Absent or
  present, you had the same power. I preferred Madeleine to Jacques
  because Madeleine was sometime to be yours. But I did not yield
  you to my daughter without a struggle. I told myself that I was
  only twenty-eight when I first met you, and you were nearly
  twenty-two; I shortened the distance between us; I gave myself up
  to delusive hopes. Oh, Felix! I tell you these things to save you
  from remorse; also, perhaps, to show you that I was not cold and
  insensible, that our sufferings were cruelly mutual; that Arabella
  had no superiority of love over mine. I too am the daughter of a
  fallen race, such as men love well.

  There came a moment when the struggle was so terrible that I wept
  the long nights through; my hair fell off,--you have it! Do you
  remember the count’s illness? Your nobility of soul far from
  raising my soul belittled it. Alas! I dreamed of giving myself to
  you some day as the reward of so much heroism; but the folly was a
  brief one. I laid it at the feet of God during the mass that day
  when you refused to be with me. Jacques’ illness and Madeleine’s
  sufferings seemed to me the warnings of God calling back to Him
  His lost sheep.

  Then your love--which is so natural--for that Englishwoman
  revealed to me secrets of which I had no knowledge. I loved you
  better than I knew. The constant emotions of this stormy life, the
  efforts that I made to subdue myself with no other succor than
  that religion gave me, all, all has brought about the malady of
  which I die. The terrible shocks I have undergone brought on
  attacks about which I kept silence. I saw in death the sole
  solution of this hidden tragedy. A lifetime of anger, jealousy,
  and rage lay in those two months between the time my mother told
  me of your relations with Lady Dudley, and your return to
  Clochegourde. I wished to go to Paris; murder was in my heart; I
  desired that woman’s death; I was indifferent to my children.
  Prayer, which had hitherto been to me a balm, was now without
  influence on my soul. Jealousy made the breach through which death
  has entered. And yet I have kept a placid brow. Yes, that period
  of struggle was a secret between God and myself. After your return
  and when I saw that I was loved, even as I loved you, that nature
  had betrayed me and not your thought, I wished to live,--it was
  then too late! God had taken me under His protection, filled no
  doubt with pity for a being true with herself, true with Him,
  whose sufferings had often led her to the gates of the sanctuary.

  My beloved! God has judged me, Monsieur de Mortsauf will pardon
  me, but you--will you be merciful? Will you listen to this voice
  which now issues from my tomb? Will you repair the evils of which
  we are equally guilty?--you, perhaps, less than I. You know what I
  wish to ask of you. Be to Monsieur de Mortsauf what a sister of
  charity is to a sick man; listen to him, love him--no one loves
  him. Interpose between him and his children as I have done. Your
  task will not be a long one. Jacques will soon leave home to be in
  Paris near his grandfather, and you have long promised me to guide
  him through the dangers of that life. As for Madeleine, she will
  marry; I pray that you may please her. She is all myself, but
  stronger; she has the will in which I am lacking; the energy
  necessary for the companion of a man whose career destines him to
  the storms of political life; she is clever and perceptive. If
  your lives are united she will be happier than her mother. By
  acquiring the right to continue my work at Clochegourde you will
  blot out the faults I have not sufficiently expiated, though they
  are pardoned in heaven and also on earth, for _he_ is generous and
  will forgive me. You see I am ever selfish; is it not the proof of
  a despotic love? I wish you to still love me in mine. Unable to be
  yours in life, I bequeath to you my thoughts and also my duties.
  If you do not wish to marry Madeleine you will at least seek the
  repose of my soul by making Monsieur de Mortsauf as happy as he
  ever can be.

  Farewell, dear child of my heart; this is the farewell of a mind
  absolutely sane, still full of life; the farewell of a spirit on
  which thou hast shed too many and too great joys to suffer thee to
  feel remorse for the catastrophe they have caused. I use that word
  “catastrophe” thinking of you and how you love me; as for me, I
  reach the haven of my rest, sacrificed to duty and not without
  regret--ah! I tremble at that thought. God knows better than I
  whether I have fulfilled his holy laws in accordance with their
  spirit. Often, no doubt, I have tottered, but I have not fallen;
  the most potent cause of my wrong-doing lay in the grandeur of the
  seductions that encompassed me. The Lord will behold me trembling
  when I enter His presence as though I had succumbed. Farewell
  again, a long farewell like that I gave last night to our dear
  valley, where I soon shall rest and where you will often--will you
  not?--return.


Henriette.

I fell into an abyss of terrible reflections, as I perceived the depths
unknown of the life now lighted up by this expiring flame. The clouds of
my egotism rolled away. She had suffered as much as I--more than I, for
she was dead. She believed that others would be kind to her friend;
she was so blinded by love that she had never so much as suspected the
enmity of her daughter. That last proof of her tenderness pained
me terribly. Poor Henriette wished to give me Clochegourde and her
daughter.

Natalie, from that dread day when first I entered a graveyard following
the remains of my noble Henriette, whom now you know, the sun has been
less warm, less luminous, the nights more gloomy, movement less agile,
thought more dull. There are some departed whom we bury in the
earth, but there are others more deeply loved for whom our souls are
winding-sheets, whose memory mingles daily with our heart-beats; we
think of them as we breathe; they are in us by the tender law of a
metempsychosis special to love. A soul is within my soul. When some good
thing is done by me, when some true word is spoken, that soul acts
and speaks. All that is good within me issues from that grave, as the
fragrance of a lily fills the air; sarcasm, bitterness, all that you
blame in me is mine. Natalie, when next my eyes are darkened by a cloud
or raised to heaven after long contemplation of earth, when my lips make
no reply to your words or your devotion, do not ask me again, “Of what
are you thinking?”

              *     *     *     *     *

Dear Natalie, I ceased to write some days ago; these memories were too
bitter for me. Still, I owe you an account of the events which followed
this catastrophe; they need few words. When a life is made up of action
and movement it is soon told, but when it passes in the higher regions
of the soul its story becomes diffuse. Henriette’s letter put the star
of hope before my eyes. In this great shipwreck I saw an isle on which
I might be rescued. To live at Clochegourde with Madeleine, consecrating
my life to hers, was a fate which satisfied the ideas of which my
heart was full. But it was necessary to know the truth as to her
real feelings. As I was bound to bid the count farewell, I went to
Clochegourde to see him, and met him on the terrace. We walked up and
down for some time. At first he spoke of the countess like a man who
knew the extent of his loss, and all the injury it was doing to his
inner self. But after the first outbreak of his grief was over he
seemed more concerned about the future than the present. He feared his
daughter, who, he told me, had not her mother’s gentleness. Madeleine’s
firm character, in which there was something heroic blending with her
mother’s gracious nature, alarmed the old man, used to Henriette’s
tenderness, and he now foresaw the power of a will that never yielded.
His only consolation for his irreparable loss, he said, was the
certainty of soon rejoining his wife; the agitations, the griefs of
these last few weeks had increased his illness and brought back all his
former pains; the struggle which he foresaw between his authority as a
father and that of his daughter, now mistress of the house, would end
his days in bitterness; for though he should have struggled against
his wife, he should, he knew, be forced to give way before his child.
Besides, his son was soon to leave him; his daughter would marry, and
what sort of son-in-law was he likely to have? Though he thus talked of
dying, his real distress was in feeling himself alone for many years to
come without sympathy.

During this hour when he spoke only of himself, and asked for my
friendship in his wife’s name, he completed a picture in my mind of the
remarkable figure of the Emigre,--one of the most imposing types of
our period. In appearance he was frail and broken, but life seemed
persistent in him because of his sober habits and his country
avocations. He is still living.

Though Madeleine could see me on the terrace, she did not come down.
Several times she came out upon the portico and went back in again, as
if to signify her contempt. I seized a moment when she appeared to beg
the count to go to the house and call her, saying I had a last wish of
her mother to convey to her, and this would be my only opportunity
of doing so. The count brought her, and left us alone together on the
terrace.

“Dear Madeleine,” I said, “if I am to speak to you, surely it should be
here where your mother listened to me when she felt she had less
reason to complain of me than of the circumstances of life. I know
your thoughts; but are you not condemning me without a knowledge of the
facts? My life and happiness are bound up in this place; you know that,
and yet you seek to banish me by the coldness you show, in place of the
brotherly affection which has always united us, and which death should
have strengthened by the bonds of a common grief. Dear Madeleine, you
for whom I would gladly give my life without hope of recompense, without
your even knowing it,--so deeply do we love the children of those who
have succored us,--you are not aware of the project your adorable mother
cherished during the last seven years. If you knew it your feelings
would doubtless soften towards me; but I do not wish to take advantage
of you now. All that I ask is that you do not deprive me of the right
to come here, to breathe the air on this terrace, and to wait until time
has changed your ideas of social life. At this moment I desire not to
ruffle them; I respect a grief which misleads you, for it takes even
from me the power of judging soberly the circumstances in which I find
myself. The saint who now looks down upon us will approve the reticence
with which I simply ask that you stand neutral between your present
feelings and my wishes. I love you too well, in spite of the aversion
you are showing me, to say one word to the count of a proposal he would
welcome eagerly. Be free. Later, remember that you know no one in
the world as you know me, that no man will ever have more devoted
feelings--”

Up to this moment Madeleine had listened with lowered eyes; now she
stopped me by a gesture.

“Monsieur,” she said, in a voice trembling with emotion. “I know all
your thoughts; but I shall not change my feelings towards you. I would
rather fling myself into the Indre than ally myself to you. I will not
speak to you of myself, but if my mother’s name still possesses any
power over you, in her name I beg you never to return to Clochegourde
so long as I am in it. The mere sight of you causes me a repugnance I
cannot express, but which I shall never overcome.”

She bowed to me with dignity, and returned to the house without looking
back, impassible as her mother had been for one day only, but more
pitiless. The searching eye of that young girl had discovered, though
tardily, the secrets of her mother’s heart, and her hatred to the man
whom she fancied fatal to her mother’s life may have been increased by a
sense of her innocent complicity.

All before me was now chaos. Madeleine hated me, without considering
whether I was the cause or the victim of these misfortunes. She might
have hated us equally, her mother and me, had we been happy. Thus it was
that the edifice of my happiness fell in ruins. I alone knew the life of
that unknown, noble woman. I alone had entered every region of her
soul; neither mother, father, husband, nor children had ever known
her.--Strange truth! I stir this heap of ashes and take pleasure in
spreading them before you; all hearts may find something in them of
their closest experience. How many families have had their Henriette!
How many noble feelings have left this earth with no historian to fathom
their hearts, to measure the depth and breadth of their spirits. Such is
human life in all its truth! Often mothers know their children as little
as their children know them. So it is with husbands, lovers, brothers.
Did I imagine that one day, beside my father’s coffin, I should contend
with my brother Charles, for whose advancement I had done so much? Good
God! how many lessons in the simplest history.

When Madeleine disappeared into the house, I went away with a broken
heart. Bidding farewell to my host at Sache, I started for Paris,
following the right bank of the Indre, the one I had taken when I
entered the valley for the first time. Sadly I drove through the pretty
village of Pont-de-Ruan. Yet I was rich, political life courted me;
I was not the weary plodder of 1814. Then my heart was full of eager
desires, now my eyes were full of tears; once my life was all before
me to fill as I could, now I knew it to be a desert. I was still
young,--only twenty-nine,--but my heart was withered. A few years had
sufficed to despoil that landscape of its early glory, and to disgust
me with life. You can imagine my feelings when, on turning round, I saw
Madeleine on the terrace.

A prey to imperious sadness, I gave no thought to the end of my journey.
Lady Dudley was far, indeed, from my mind, and I entered the courtyard
of her house without reflection. The folly once committed, I was forced
to carry it out. My habits were conjugal in her house, and I went
upstairs thinking of the annoyances of a rupture. If you have fully
understood the character and manners of Lady Dudley, you can imagine
my discomfiture when her majordomo ushered me, still in my travelling
dress, into a salon where I found her sumptuously dressed and surrounded
by four persons. Lord Dudley, one of the most distinguished old
statesmen of England, was standing with his back to the fireplace,
stiff, haughty, frigid, with the sarcastic air he doubtless wore in
parliament; he smiled when he heard my name. Arabella’s two children,
who were amazingly like de Marsay (a natural son of the old lord), were
near their mother; de Marsay himself was on the sofa beside her. As
soon as Arabella saw me she assumed a distant air, and glanced at my
travelling cap as if to ask what brought me there. She looked me
over from head to foot, as though I were some country gentlemen just
presented to her. As for our intimacy, that eternal passion, those vows
of suicide if I ceased to love her, those visions of Armida, all had
vanished like a dream. I had never clasped her hand; I was a stranger;
she knew me not. In spite of the diplomatic self-possession to which
I was gradually being trained, I was confounded; and all others in my
place would have felt the same. De Marsay smiled at his boots, which
he examined with remarkable interest. I decided at once upon my course.
From any other woman I should modestly have accepted my defeat; but,
outraged at the glowing appearance of the heroine who had vowed to
die for love, and who had scoffed at the woman who was really dead,
I resolved to meet insolence with insolence. She knew very well the
misfortunes of Lady Brandon; to remind her of them was to send a dagger
to her heart, though the weapon might be blunted by the blow.

“Madame,” I said, “I am sure you will pardon my unceremonious entrance,
when I tell you that I have just arrived from Touraine, and that Lady
Brandon has given me a message for you which allows of no delay. I
feared you had already started for Lancashire, but as you are still
in Paris I will await your orders at any hour you may be pleased to
appoint.”

She bowed, and I left the room. Since that day I have only met her in
society, where we exchange a friendly bow, and occasionally a sarcasm. I
talk to her of the inconsolable women of Lancashire; she makes allusion
to Frenchwomen who dignify their gastric troubles by calling them
despair. Thanks to her, I have a mortal enemy in de Marsay, of whom she
is very fond. In return, I call her the wife of two generations.

So my disaster was complete; it lacked nothing. I followed the plan I
had laid out for myself during my retreat at Sache; I plunged into work
and gave myself wholly to science, literature, and politics. I entered
the diplomatic service on the accession of Charles X., who suppressed
the employment I held under the late king. From that moment I was
firmly resolved to pay no further attention to any woman, no matter how
beautiful, witty, or loving she might be. This determination succeeded
admirably; I obtained a really marvellous tranquillity of mind, and
great powers of work, and I came to understand how much these women
waste our lives, believing, all the while, that a few gracious words
will repay us.

But--all my resolutions came to naught; you know how and why. Dear
Natalie, in telling you my life, without reserve, without concealment,
precisely as I tell it to myself, in relating to you feelings in which
you have had no share, perhaps I have wounded some corner of your
sensitive and jealous heart. But that which might anger a common woman
will be to you--I feel sure of it--an additional reason for loving me.
Noble women have indeed a sublime mission to fulfil to suffering and
sickened hearts,--the mission of the sister of charity who stanches the
wound, of the mother who forgives a child. Artists and poets are not
the only ones who suffer; men who work for their country, for the future
destiny of the nations, enlarging thus the circle of their passions and
their thoughts, often make for themselves a cruel solitude. They need
a pure, devoted love beside them,--believe me, they understand its
grandeur and its worth.

To-morrow I shall know if I have deceived myself in loving you.

Felix.


  ANSWER TO THE ENVOI

  Madame la Comtesse Natalie de Manerville to Monsieur le Comte
  Felix de Vandenesse.

  Dear Count,--You received a letter from poor Madame de Mortsauf,
  which, you say, was of use in guiding you through the world,--a
  letter to which you owe your distinguished career. Permit me to
  finish your education.

  Give up, I beg of you, a really dreadful habit; do not imitate
  certain widows who talk of their first husband and throw the
  virtues of the deceased in the face of their second. I am a
  Frenchwoman, dear count; I wish to marry the whole of the man I
  love, and I really cannot marry Madame de Mortsauf too. Having
  read your tale with all the attention it deserves,--and you know
  the interest I feel in you,--it seems to me that you must have
  wearied Lady Dudley with the perfections of Madame de Mortsauf,
  and done great harm to the countess by overwhelming her with the
  experiences of your English love. Also you have failed in tact to
  me, poor creature without other merit than that of pleasing you;
  you have given me to understand that I cannot love as Henriette or
  Arabella loved you. I acknowledge my imperfections; I know them;
  but why so roughly make me feel them?

  Shall I tell you whom I pity?--the fourth woman whom you love. She
  will be forced to struggle against three others. Therefore, in
  your interests as well as in hers, I must warn you against the
  dangers of your tale. For myself, I renounce the laborious glory
  of loving you,--it needs too many virtues, Catholic or Anglican,
  and I have no fancy for rivalling phantoms. The virtues of the
  virgin of Clochegourde would dishearten any woman, however sure of
  herself she might be, and your intrepid English amazon discourages
  even a wish for that sort of happiness. No matter what a poor
  woman may do, she can never hope to give you the joys she will
  aspire to give. Neither heart nor senses can triumph against these
  memories of yours. I own that I have never been able to warm the
  sunshine chilled for you by the death of your sainted Henriette. I
  have felt you shuddering beside me.

  My friend,--for you will always be my friend,--never make such
  confidences again; they lay bare your disillusions; they
  discourage love, and compel a woman to feel doubtful of herself.
  Love, dear count, can only live on trustfulness. The woman who
  before she says a word or mounts her horse, must ask herself
  whether a celestial Henriette might not have spoken better,
  whether a rider like Arabella was not more graceful, that woman
  you may be very sure, will tremble in all her members. You
  certainly have given me a desire to receive a few of those
  intoxicating bouquets--but you say you will make no more. There
  are many other things you dare no longer do; thoughts and
  enjoyments you can never reawaken. No woman, and you ought to know
  this, will be willing to elbow in your heart the phantom whom you
  hold there.

  You ask me to love you out of Christian charity. I could do much,
  I candidly admit, for charity; in fact I could do all--except
  love. You are sometimes wearisome and wearied; you call your
  dulness melancholy. Very good,--so be it; but all the same it is
  intolerable, and causes much cruel anxiety to one who loves you. I
  have often found the grave of that saint between us. I have
  searched my own heart, I know myself, and I own I do not wish to
  die as she did. If you tired out Lady Dudley, who is a very
  distinguished woman, I, who have not her passionate desires,
  should, I fear, turn coldly against you even sooner than she did.
  Come, let us suppress love between us, inasmuch as you can find
  happiness only with the dead, and let us be merely friends--I wish
  it.

  Ah! my dear count, what a history you have told me! At your
  entrance into life you found an adorable woman, a perfect
  mistress, who thought of your future, made you a peer, loved you
  to distraction, only asked that you would be faithful to her, and
  you killed her! I know nothing more monstrous. Among all the
  passionate and unfortunate young men who haunt the streets of
  Paris, I doubt if there is one who would not stay virtuous ten
  years to obtain one half of the favors you did not know how to
  value! When a man is loved like that how can he ask more? Poor
  woman! she suffered indeed; and after you have written a few
  sentimental phrases you think you have balanced your account with
  her coffin. Such, no doubt, is the end that awaits my tenderness
  for you. Thank you, dear count, I will have no rival on either
  side of the grave. When a man has such a crime upon his
  conscience, at least he ought not to tell of it. I made you an
  imprudent request; but I was true to my woman’s part as a daughter
  of Eve,--it was your part to estimate the effect of the answer.
  You ought to have deceived me; later I should have thanked you. Is
  it possible that you have never understood the special virtue of
  lovers? Can you not feel how generous they are in swearing that
  they have never loved before, and love at last for the first time?

  No, your programme cannot be carried out. To attempt to be both
  Madame de Mortsauf and Lady Dudley,--why, my dear friend, it would
  be trying to unite fire and water within me! Is it possible that
  you don’t know women? Believe me, they are what they are, and they
  have therefore the defects of their virtues. You met Lady Dudley
  too early in life to appreciate her, and the harm you say of her
  seems to me the revenge of your wounded vanity. You understood
  Madame de Mortsauf too late; you punished one for not being the
  other,--what would happen to me if I were neither the one nor the
  other? I love you enough to have thought deeply about your future;
  in fact, I really care for you a great deal. Your air of the
  Knight of the Sad Countenance has always deeply interested me; I
  believed in the constancy of melancholy men; but I little thought
  that you had killed the loveliest and the most virtuous of women
  at the opening of your life.

  Well, I ask myself, what remains for you to do? I have thought it
  over carefully. I think, my friend, that you will have to marry a
  Mrs. Shandy, who will know nothing of love or of passion, and will
  not trouble herself about Madame de Mortsauf or Lady Dudley; who
  will be wholly indifferent to those moments of ennui which you
  call melancholy, during which you are as lively as a rainy day,--a
  wife who will be to you, in short, the excellent sister of charity
  whom you are seeking. But as for loving, quivering at a word,
  anticipating happiness, giving it, receiving it, experiencing all
  the tempests of passion, cherishing the little weaknesses of a
  beloved woman--my dear count, renounce it all! You have followed
  the advice of your good angel about young women too closely; you
  have avoided them so carefully that now you know nothing about
  them. Madame de Mortsauf was right to place you high in life at
  the start; otherwise all women would have been against you, and
  you never would have risen in society.

  It is too late now to begin your training over again; too late to
  learn to tell us what we long to hear; to be superior to us at the
  right moment, or to worship our pettiness when it pleases us to be
  petty. We are not so silly as you think us. When we love we place
  the man of our choice above all else. Whatever shakes our faith in
  our supremacy shakes our love. In flattering us men flatter
  themselves. If you intend to remain in society, to enjoy an
  intercourse with women, you must carefully conceal from them all
  that you have told me; they will not be willing to sow the flowers
  of their love upon the rocks or lavish their caresses to soothe a
  sickened spirit. Women will discover the barrenness of your heart
  and you will be ever more and more unhappy. Few among them would
  be frank enough to tell you what I have told you, or sufficiently
  good-natured to leave you without rancor, offering their
  friendship, like the woman who now subscribes herself

  Your devoted friend,

  Natalie de Manerville.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Birotteau, Abbe Francois
       Cesar Birotteau
       The Vicar of Tours

     Blamont-Chauvry, Princesse de
       The Thirteen
       Madame Firmiani

     Brandon, Lady Marie Augusta
       The Member for Arcis
       La Grenadiere

     Chessel, Madame de
       The Government Clerks

     Dudley, Lord
       The Thirteen
       A Man of Business
       Another Study of Woman
       A Daughter of Eve

     Dudley, Lady Arabella
       The Ball at Sceaux
       The Magic Skin
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Daughter of Eve
       Letters of Two Brides

     Givry
       Letters of Two Brides
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Lenoncourt, Duc de
       Cesar Birotteau
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Beatrix

     Lenoncourt-Givry, Duchesse de
       Letters of Two Brides
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

     Listomere, Marquis de
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Study of Woman

     Listomere, Marquise de
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       A Study of Woman
       A Daughter of Eve

     Louis XVIII., Louis-Stanislas-Xavier
       The Chouans
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Gondreville Mystery
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Ball at Sceaux
       Colonel Chabert
       The Government Clerks

     Manerville, Comtesse Paul de
       A Marriage Settlement
       A Daughter of Eve

     Marsay, Henri de
       The Thirteen
       The Unconscious Humorists
       Another Study of Woman
       Father Goriot
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Marriage Settlement
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Letters of Two Brides
       The Ball at Sceaux
       The Secrets of a Princess
       The Gondreville Mystery
       A Daughter of Eve

     Stanhope, Lady Esther
       Lost Illusions

     Vandenesse, Comte Felix de
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Cesar Birotteau
       Letters of Two Brides
       A Start in Life
       The Marriage Settlement
       The Secrets of a Princess
       Another Study of Woman
       The Gondreville Mystery
       A Daughter of Eve






End of Project Gutenberg’s The Lily of the Valley, by Honore de Balzac
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################