“Ah! madame,” replied the doctor, “I have some appalling stories in my collection. But each has its proper hour in a conversation—you know Chamfort’s jest to the Duc de Fronsac: ‘Between your sally and the present moment lie ten bottles of champagne.’”

“But it is two in the morning, and the story of Rosina has prepared us,” said the mistress of the house.

“Tell us, Monsieur Bianchon!” cried everyone.

The obliging doctor bowed, and silence reigned.

“At about a hundred paces from Vendôme, on the banks of the Loir,” he began, “stands an old brown house, crowned with very high roofs, so isolated that there is nothing near it, not even a fetid tannery or a squalid tavern. In front is a garden down to the river, where box shrubs once clipped to edge the walks now straggle at will. A few willows rooted in the stream have grown up quickly like an enclosing fence, half hiding the house. Wild plants have clothed the bank; the fruit trees, neglected for ten years, no longer bear, and their suckers form a thicket. The espaliers resemble a copse. The paths, once graveled, are overgrown—indeed, there is no trace of a path.

“From the hilltop where the ruins of the old castle of the Dukes of Vendôme cling, one can see this spot must once have been the joy of a country gentleman devoted to horticulture, especially to choice fruit. An arbor, or rather its wreck, with a table still standing, remains. The aspect of this garden evokes the peaceful life of the provinces, like reading a worthy tradesman’s epitaph. To complete the mournful impressions, one wall bears a sundial graced with the motto, ‘Ultimam cogita.’

“The roof is dreadfully dilapidated; the outside shutters are always closed; the balconies are hung with swallows’ nests; the doors forever shut. Straggling grasses outline flagstones; the ironwork is rusty. Moon and sun, winter, summer, and snow have eaten into the wood, warped the boards, and peeled off the paint. The dreary silence is broken only by birds and cats, polecats, rats, and mice, free to scamper around. An invisible hand has written over it all: ‘Mystery.’

“If you look at this house from the street, you will see a large gate with a round-arched top, full of holes made by children. I later learned that this door had been blocked for ten years. Through these breaches you see the courtyard side in perfect harmony with the garden side: the same ruin. Weeds outline the paving-stones; the walls are scored by enormous cracks; the blackened coping is laced with pellitory. The stone steps are disjointed; the bell-cord is rotten; the gutter-spouts broken. What fire from heaven could have fallen there? By what decree has salt been sown on this dwelling? Has God been mocked here? Or was France betrayed? These are the questions we ask ourselves. Reptiles crawl over it, but give no reply. This empty, deserted house is a vast enigma.

“It was formerly a little domain, held in fief, known as La Grande Bretèche. During my stay at Vendôme, where Despleins had left me in charge of a rich patient, the sight of this strange dwelling became one of my keenest pleasures. Was it not better than a ruin? A ruin keeps memories; this house, still standing though slowly destroyed by an avenging hand, contained a secret, an unrevealed thought. More than once in the evening I climbed the wild hedge surrounding the enclosure, braving scratches to enter this ownerless garden, lingering for hours in its disorder. I would not have asked a single question of any gossiping native for the price of the story to which this strange scene was due. There I wove romances and indulged in melancholy that enchanted me. Had I known the reason for the neglect, I would have lost the unwritten poetry that intoxicated me. To me, this refuge represented phases of human life shadowed by misfortune; sometimes the peace of a graveyard without the dead, who speak in the language of epitaphs; one day I saw it as the home of lepers; another, the house of the Atridae; but above all, I found there provincial life, contemplative and hour-glass-like. I often wept there; I never laughed.

“More than once, involuntary terrors seized me as I heard overhead the dull hum of some hurrying wood-pigeon. The earth is dank; you must watch for lizards, vipers, and frogs wandering about with wild freedom; above all, you must have no fear of cold, for in a few moments you feel an icy cloak settle on your shoulders, like the Commendatore’s hand on Don Giovanni’s neck.

“One evening I felt a shudder; the wind had turned an old rusty weathercock, and the creaking sounded like a cry from the house, just as I was finishing a gloomy drama to account for this monumental embodiment of woe. I returned to my inn, lost in gloomy thoughts. After supper, the hostess came into my room with an air of mystery, saying, ‘Monsieur, here is Monsieur Regnault.’

“‘Who is Monsieur Regnault?’

“‘What, sir, do you not know Monsieur Regnault?—Well, that’s odd,’ she said, leaving the room.

“Suddenly a tall, slim man dressed in black appeared, hat in hand, entering like a ram. He had a receding forehead, a small pointed head, and a colorless face like dirty water. You would have taken him for an usher. His coat was old, worn at the seams, but he had a diamond in his shirt frill and gold rings in his ears.

“‘Monsieur,’ I said, ‘whom have I the honor of addressing?’ He took a chair, placed himself in front of my fire, put his hat on my table, and answered while rubbing his hands: ‘Dear me, it is very cold.—Monsieur, I am Monsieur Regnault.’

“I encouraged myself with the thought: Seek!

“‘I am,’ he continued, ‘notary at Vendôme.’

“‘I am delighted to hear it, monsieur,’ I exclaimed. ‘But I am not in a position to make a will for reasons best known to myself.’

“‘One moment!’ he said, holding up his hand as if to gain silence. ‘Allow me, monsieur! I am informed that you sometimes walk in the garden of la Grande Bretèche.’

“‘Yes, monsieur.’

“‘One moment! That constitutes a misdemeanor. Monsieur, as executor under the will of the late Comtesse de Merret, I come in her name to beg you to discontinue the practice. One moment! I am not a Turk and do not wish to make a crime of it. Besides, you are free to be ignorant of the circumstances which compel me to leave the finest mansion in Vendôme to fall into ruin. Nevertheless, you must be a man of education, and you should know that the laws forbid, under heavy penalties, any trespass on enclosed property. A hedge is the same as a wall. But the state in which the place is left may excuse your curiosity. For my part, I should be quite content to make you free to come and go in the house; but being bound to respect the will of the testatrix, I have the honor, monsieur, to beg that you will go into the garden no more. I myself, monsieur, since the will was read, have never set foot in the house, which, as I had the honor of informing you, is part of the estate of the late Madame de Merret. We have done nothing there but verify the number of doors and windows to assess the taxes I have to pay annually out of the funds left for that purpose by the late Madame de Merret. Ah! my dear sir, her will made a great commotion in the town.’

“The good man paused to blow his nose. I respected his volubility, understanding that the administration of Madame de Merret’s estate had been the most important event of his life, his reputation, his glory, his Restoration. As I was forced to bid farewell to my beautiful reveries and romances, I was to reject learning the truth on official authority.

“‘Monsieur,’ I said, ‘would it be indiscreet if I were to ask you the reasons for such eccentricity?’

“At these words, an expression of pleasure spread across the lawyer’s countenance. He pulled up his collar, took out his snuffbox, opened it, and offered me a pinch; on my refusing, he took a large one. He was happy! A man without a hobby does not know all the good to be had in life. At that moment I understood Sterne’s charming passion and had a perfect idea of the delight with which my uncle Toby, encouraged by Trim, bestrode his hobby-horse.

“‘Monsieur,’ said Monsieur Regnault, ‘I was head-clerk in Monsieur Roguin’s office in Paris. A first-rate house, which you may have heard of? No! An unfortunate bankruptcy made it famous. Not having enough money to purchase a practice in Paris at the inflated prices of 1816, I came here and bought my predecessor’s business. I had relations in Vendôme; among others, a wealthy aunt who allowed me to marry her daughter. Three months after being licensed by the Keeper of the Seals, one evening, as I was going to bed—it was before my marriage—I was sent for by Madame la Comtesse de Merret to her Château of Merret. Her maid, a good girl who is now a servant in this inn, was waiting at my door with the Countess’ own carriage. Ah! one moment! I ought to tell you that Monsieur le Comte de Merret had gone to Paris to die two months before I came here. He came to a miserable end, flinging himself into every kind of dissipation. You understand?

“‘On the day when he left, Madame la Comtesse had quitted la Grande Bretèche, having dismantled it. Some people even say she burnt all the furniture, the hangings—in short, everything used in furnishing the premises now let by the said M.—(Dear, what am I saying? I beg your pardon, I thought I was dictating a lease.)—In short, that she burnt everything in the meadow at Merret. Have you been to Merret, monsieur?—No,’ he answered himself, ‘Ah, it is a very fine place.’

“‘For about three months previously,’ he continued with a jerk of his head, ‘the Count and Countess had lived in an eccentric way; they admitted no visitors; Madame lived on the ground floor, and Monsieur on the first floor. When the Countess was left alone she was never seen except at church. Subsequently at the château she refused to see friends who went to call on her. She was already very much altered when she left la Grande Bretèche to go to Merret. That dear lady—I say dear, for it was she who gave me this diamond, but indeed I saw her but once—was very ill; she had, no doubt, given up all hope, for she died without choosing to send for a doctor; indeed, many fancied she was not quite right in her head. Well, sir, my curiosity was strangely excited by hearing that Madame de Merret had need of my services. Nor was I the only person who took an interest in the affair. That very night, though it was already late, all the town knew that I was going to Merret.

“‘The waiting-woman replied vaguely to my questions on the way; nevertheless, she told me that her mistress had received the Sacrament in the course of the day at the hands of the Curé of Merret and seemed unlikely to live through the night. It was about eleven when I reached the château. I went up the great staircase. After crossing some large, lofty, dark rooms, diabolically cold and damp, I reached the state bedroom where the Countess lay. From the rumors current concerning this lady (monsieur, I should never end if I were to repeat all the tales that were told about her), I had imagined her a coquette. Imagine, then, that I had great difficulty in seeing her in the great bed where she was lying. To light this enormous room, with old-fashioned heavy cornices, and so thick with dust that merely to see it was enough to make you sneeze, she had only an old Argand lamp. Ah! but you have not been to Merret. Well, the bed is one of those old world beds, with a high tester hung with flowered chintz. A small table stood by the bed, on which I saw an ‘Imitation of Christ,’ which, by the way, I bought for my wife, as well as the lamp. There were also a deep armchair for her confidential maid and two small chairs. There was no fire. That was all the furniture, not enough to fill ten lines in an inventory.

“‘My dear sir, if you had seen, as I then saw, that vast room, papered and hung with brown, you would have felt yourself transported into a scene of a romance. It was icy, nay more, funereal,’ and he lifted his hand with a theatrical gesture and paused.

“‘By dint of seeking, as I approached the bed, at last I saw Madame de Merret, under the glimmer of the lamp, which fell on the pillows. Her face was as yellow as wax, and as narrow as two folded hands. The Countess had a lace cap showing her abundant hair, but as white as linen thread. She was sitting up in bed, and seemed to keep upright with great difficulty. Her large black eyes, dimmed by fever no doubt, and half-dead already, hardly moved under the bony arch of her eyebrows.—There,’ he added, pointing to his own brow. ‘Her forehead was clammy; her fleshless hands were like bones covered with soft skin; the veins and muscles were perfectly visible. She must have been very handsome; but at this moment I was startled into an indescribable emotion at the sight. Never, said those who wrapped her in her shroud, had any living creature been so emaciated and lived. In short, it was awful to behold! Sickness so consumed that woman, that she was no more than a phantom. Her lips, pale violet, seemed not to move when she spoke to me.

“‘Though my profession has familiarized me with such spectacles, by calling me not infrequently to the bedside of the dying, I confess that families in tears and the agonies I have seen were as nothing in comparison with this lonely and silent woman in her vast château. I heard not the least sound; I did not perceive the movement which the sufferer’s breathing ought to have given to the sheets that covered her, and I stood motionless, absorbed in looking at her in a sort of stupor. In fancy, I am there still. At last her large eyes moved; she tried to raise her right hand, but it fell back on the bed, and she uttered these words, which came like a breath, for her voice was no longer a voice: “I have waited for you with the greatest impatience.” A bright flush rose to her cheeks. It was a great effort to her to speak.

“‘“Madame,” I began.’ She signed to me to be silent. At that moment, the old housekeeper rose and said in my ear, “Do not speak; Madame la Comtesse is not in a state to bear the slightest noise, and what you say might agitate her.”

“‘I sat down. A few instants later, Madame de Merret collected all her remaining strength to move her right hand and slipped it, not without infinite difficulty, under the bolster; she then paused a moment. With a last effort, she withdrew her hand; and when she brought out a sealed paper, drops of perspiration rolled from her brow. “I place my will in your hands—Oh! God! Oh!” and that was all. She clutched a crucifix that lay on the bed, lifted it hastily to her lips, and died.

“‘The expression of her eyes still makes me shudder as I think of it. She must have suffered much! There was joy in her last glance, and it remained stamped on her dead eyes.

“‘I brought away the will, and when it was opened, I found that Madame de Merret had appointed me her executor. She left the whole of her property to the hospital at Vendôme except for a few legacies. But these were her instructions regarding la Grande Bretèche: She ordered me to leave the place, for fifty years from the day of her death, in the state it was at the time of her death, forbidding anyone, whoever he might be, to enter the apartments, prohibiting any repairs whatever, and even settling a salary to pay watchmen if it were necessary to secure the absolute fulfillment of her intentions. At the expiration of that term, if the will of the testatrix has been duly carried out, the house is to become the property of my heirs, for, as you know, a notary cannot take a bequest. Otherwise, la Grande Bretèche reverts to the heirs-at-law, but on condition of fulfilling certain conditions set forth in a codicil to the will, which is not to be opened until the expiration of the said term of fifty years. The will has not been disputed, so——’ And without finishing his sentence, the lanky notary looked at me with an air of triumph; I made him quite happy by offering him my congratulations.

“‘Monsieur,’ I said in conclusion, ‘you have so vividly impressed me that I fancy I see the dying woman whiter than her sheets; her glittering eyes frighten me; I shall dream of her tonight.—But you must have formed some idea as to the instructions contained in that extraordinary will.’

“‘Monsieur,’ said he, with comical reticence, ‘I never allow myself to criticize the conduct of a person who honors me with the gift of a diamond.’

“However, I soon loosened the tongue of the discreet notary of Vendôme, who communicated to me, not without long digressions, the opinions of the deep politicians of both sexes whose judgments are law in Vendôme. But these opinions were so contradictory and diffuse that I was near falling asleep despite my interest in this authentic history. The notary’s ponderous voice and monotonous accent, accustomed no doubt to listen to himself and to make himself listened to by his clients or fellow-townsmen, were too much for my curiosity. Happily, he soon went away.

“‘Ah, ha, monsieur,’ said he on the stairs, ‘a good many persons would be glad to live five-and-forty years longer; but—one moment!’ and he laid the first finger of his right hand to his nostril with a cunning look, as much as to say, ‘Mark my words!—To last as long as that—as long as that,’ said he, ‘you must not be past sixty now.’

“I closed my door, having been roused from my apathy by this last speech, which the notary thought very funny; then I sat down in my armchair, with my feet on the fire-dogs. I had lost myself in a romance à la Radcliffe, constructed on the juridical base given me by Monsieur Regnault, when the door, opened by a woman’s cautious hand, turned on the hinges. I saw my landlady come in, a buxom, florid dame, always good-humored, who had missed her calling in life. She was a Fleming, who ought to have seen the light in a picture by Teniers.

“‘Well, monsieur,’ said she, ‘Monsieur Regnault has no doubt been giving you his history of la Grande Bretèche?’

“‘Yes, Madame Lepas.’

“‘And what did he tell you?’

“I repeated in a few words the creepy and sinister story of Madame de Merret. At each sentence my hostess put her head forward, looking at me with an innkeeper’s keen scrutiny, a happy compromise between the instinct of a police constable, the astuteness of a spy, and the cunning of a dealer.

“‘My good Madame Lepas,’ said I as I ended, ‘you seem to know more about it. Heh? If not, why have you come up to me?’

“‘On my word, as an honest woman——’

“‘Do not swear; your eyes are big with a secret. You knew Monsieur de Merret; what sort of man was he?’

“‘Monsieur de Merret—well, you see he was a man you never could see the top of, he was so tall! A very good gentleman from Picardy, who had, as we say, his head close to his cap. He paid for everything down, so as never to have difficulties with anyone. He was hot-tempered, you see! All our ladies liked him very much.’

“‘Because he was hot-tempered?’ I asked.

“‘Well, maybe,’ she said; ‘and you may suppose, sir, that a man had to have something to show for a figurehead before he could marry Madame de Merret, who, without any reflection on others, was the handsomest and richest heiress in our parts. She had about twenty thousand francs a year. All the town was at the wedding; the bride was pretty and sweet-looking, quite a gem of a woman. Oh, they were a handsome couple in their day!’

“‘And were they happy together?’

“‘Hm, hm! so-so—so far as can be guessed, for, as you may suppose, we of the common sort were not hail-fellow-well-met with them.—Madame de Merret was a kind woman and very pleasant, who had no doubt sometimes to put up with her husband’s tantrums. But though he was rather haughty, we were fond of him. After all, it was his place to behave so. When a man is a born nobleman, you see——’

“‘Still, there must have been some catastrophe for Monsieur and Madame de Merret to part so violently?’

“‘I did not say there was any catastrophe, sir. I know nothing about it.’

“‘Indeed. Well, now, I am sure you know everything.’

“‘Well, sir, I will tell you the whole story.—When I saw Monsieur Regnault go up to see you, it struck me that he would speak to you about Madame de Merret as having to do with la Grande Bretèche. That put it into my head to ask your advice, sir, seeming to me that you are a man of good judgment and incapable of playing a poor woman like me false—for I never did anyone a wrong, and yet I am tormented by my conscience. Up to now, I have never dared to say a word to the people of these parts; they are all chatter-mags, with tongues like knives. And never till now, sir, have I had any traveler here who stayed so long in the inn as you have, and to whom I could tell the history of the fifteen thousand francs——’

“‘My dear Madame Lepas, if there is anything in your story of a nature to compromise me,’ I said, interrupting her flow of words, ‘I would not hear it for all the world.’

“‘You need have no fears,’ said she; ‘you will see.’

“Her eagerness made me suspect that I was not the only person to whom my worthy landlady had communicated the secret of which I was to be the sole possessor, but I listened.

“‘Monsieur,’ said she, ‘when the Emperor sent the Spaniards here, prisoners of war and others, I was required to lodge at the charge of the Government a young Spaniard sent to Vendôme on parole. Notwithstanding his parole, he had to show himself every day to the sub-prefect. He was a Spanish grandee—neither more nor less. He had a name in os and dia, something like Bagos de Férédia. I wrote his name down in my books, and you may see it if you like. Ah! he was a handsome young fellow for a Spaniard, who are all ugly they say. He was not more than five feet two or three in height, but so well made; and he had little hands that he kept so beautifully! Ah! you should have seen them. He had as many brushes for his hands as a woman has for her toilet. He had thick, black hair, a flame in his eye, a somewhat coppery complexion, but which I admired all the same. He wore the finest linen I have ever seen, though I have had princesses to lodge here, and, among others, General Bertrand, the Duc and Duchesse d’Abrantes, Monsieur Descazes, and the King of Spain. He did not eat much, but he had such polite and amiable ways that it was impossible to owe him a grudge for that. Oh! I was very fond of him, though he did not say four words to me in a day, and it was impossible to have the least bit of talk with him; if he was spoken to, he did not answer; it is a way, a mania they all have, it would seem.

“‘He read his breviary like a priest and went to mass and all the services quite regularly. And where did he post himself?—we found this out later.—Within two yards of Madame de Merret’s chapel. As he took that place the very first time he entered the church, no one imagined that there was any purpose in it. Besides, he never raised his nose above his book, poor young man! And then, monsieur, of an evening he went for a walk on the hill among the ruins of the old castle. It was his only amusement, poor man; it reminded him of his native land. They say that Spain is all hills!
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“One evening, shortly after he arrived, he stayed out late. I was uneasy when he didn’t return until midnight, but we were used to his whims; he took the key and we didn’t wait for him. He lived in a house we owned on Rue des Casernes. One of our stable-boys mentioned he thought he saw the Spanish Grandee swimming in the river. When he returned, I warned him about the weeds, and he seemed annoyed at being seen.

“Eventually, one morning, we found he hadn’t returned. Searching his belongings, I discovered a note in his drawer, along with fifty doubloons worth about five thousand francs and a sealed box containing diamonds worth ten thousand francs. The note stated that if he didn’t return, he left us this money and the diamonds to fund masses in gratitude for his escape.

“At that time, my husband went searching for him. Interestingly, he returned with the Spaniard’s clothes, found under a stone on a breakwater near la Grande Bretèche. He went early, so no one saw him. After reading the letter, he burned the clothes and, following Count Férédia’s wishes, we announced he had escaped.

“The sub-prefect sent the constabulary after him, but he was never caught. Lepas believed the Spaniard drowned himself. I, however, think he was involved in the matter concerning Madame de Merret, especially since Rosalie told me that the crucifix her mistress cherished and was buried with was made of ebony and silver; early in his stay, Monsieur Férédia had a similar crucifix, which I never saw again. Now, monsieur, do you think I should feel remorse about the Spaniard’s fifteen thousand francs? Aren’t they truly mine?

“Certainly. But have you ever questioned Rosalie?” I asked.

“Oh, I have, sir. But what can be done? That girl is like a wall. She knows something, but it’s impossible to make her talk.”

After a brief chat, my hostess left me with vague, sinister thoughts, romantic curiosity, and a religious dread, akin to the emotion felt when entering a dark church at night, where a faint light glimmers under a high vault. La Grande Bretèche, with its overgrown grass, shuttered windows, rusty ironwork, and deserted rooms, suddenly appeared vividly in my mind. I felt compelled to explore the mysterious dwelling to uncover the heart of this solemn story, this drama that had claimed three lives.

Rosalie became the most intriguing person in Vendôme to me. Observing her, I sensed an inner thought beneath her blooming health. There was an element of sorrow or hope in her soul; her demeanor suggested a secret, reminiscent of devout souls who pray excessively or a girl who has killed her child and forever hears its last cry. Yet, she was simple and clumsy, her vacant smile devoid of criminality, and one would deem her innocent just by seeing the large checked kerchief covering her sturdy figure, tucked into her lilac-and-white-striped gown. No, I resolved, I will not leave Vendôme without knowing the full story of la Grande Bretèche. To achieve this, I will make advances toward Rosalie if necessary.

“Rosalie!” I called one evening.

“Your servant, sir?”

“You’re not married?” She flinched slightly.

“Oh! There’s no shortage of men if I ever fancy being miserable!” she laughed, quickly regaining her composure; every woman, from the highest lady to the inn-servant, possesses a natural presence of mind.

“Yes; you’re attractive enough to never lack suitors! But tell me, Rosalie, why did you become an inn-servant after leaving Madame de Merret? Didn’t she leave you a small annuity?”

“Oh yes, sir. But my position here is the best in all Vendôme.”

This response seemed evasive. Rosalie appeared to hold a central role in this romantic affair; she seemed tied to its core. It wasn’t a matter for ordinary courtship; this girl contained the final chapter of a romance, and from that moment, all my attention was directed toward Rosalie. By studying her, I noticed various admirable qualities; she was clean, neat, and undeniably attractive, soon embodying every charm desire can bestow upon a woman, regardless of her station. A fortnight after the notary’s visit, one early morning, I said to Rosalie:

“Come, tell me all you know about Madame de Merret.”

“Oh!” she replied, “I will tell you, but keep it a secret.”

“Of course, my child; I will guard your secrets with a thief’s honor, the most loyal known.”

“If it’s all the same to you,” she said, “I’d prefer it be with your own.”

She adjusted her head-kerchief and settled in to tell the tale; a particular attitude of confidence is necessary for storytelling. The best tales are told at a certain hour—just as we are all here at table. No one ever tells a story well standing or fasting.

If I were to reproduce Rosalie’s diffuse eloquence, a whole volume would scarcely suffice. Now, as the event she recounted stands midway between the notary’s gossip and Madame Lepas’s account, I will summarize it concisely.

The room at la Grande Bretèche where Madame de Merret slept was on the ground floor; a small cupboard in the wall, about four feet deep, served as her wardrobe. Three months before the evening in question, Madame de Merret had been seriously ill, so much so that her husband had taken to sleeping on the first floor. By chance, he returned home two hours later than usual from the club, where he had been reading the papers and discussing politics. His wife assumed he was in bed and asleep. However, the evening’s animated discussions and his losses at billiards had delayed him.

For some time, Monsieur de Merret had relied on Rosalie to inform him if his wife was in bed; her affirmative responses led him to his room, trusting her completely. But that evening, he decided to check on Madame de Merret to share his misfortunes and perhaps seek comfort. He had noticed her looking particularly lovely at dinner and thought her convalescence had enhanced her beauty, a realization that often comes too late for husbands.

Upon entering, he thought he heard the closet door shut, but when he entered, Madame de Merret stood alone by the fireplace. His instincts were piqued by a nagging doubt, and he noticed an anxious expression in her eyes.

“You’re very late,” she said, her voice slightly husky.

Monsieur de Merret remained silent as Rosalie entered, which startled him. He began pacing the room, arms crossed.

“Have you received bad news, or are you unwell?” his wife asked timidly while Rosalie helped her undress. He didn’t respond.

“You can go, Rosalie,” Madame de Merret said; “I can manage my curl-papers myself.” She sensed disaster in her husband’s demeanor and wanted to be alone with him. Once Rosalie left, or was thought to have left, for she lingered in the passage, Monsieur de Merret confronted his wife, stating coldly, “Madame, there’s someone in your cupboard!” She calmly replied, “No, monsieur.”

This “No” pierced Monsieur de Merret’s heart; he didn’t believe it, yet his wife appeared more saintly than ever. He moved to open the closet door, but Madame de Merret took his hand, stopping him, and said with strange emotion, “Remember, if you find no one there, everything must end between us.”

The extraordinary dignity of her stance filled him with deep respect and inspired a resolve that could become legendary on a grander stage.

“No, Josephine,” he said, “I won’t open it. Regardless of the outcome, we would be forever parted. I know your soul’s purity; you wouldn’t commit a deadly sin to save your life.” At these words, Madame de Merret looked at him with a haggard expression. “Here is your crucifix,” he continued. “Swear to me before God that there’s no one in that closet; I will believe you—I will never open that door.”

Madame de Merret took the crucifix and swore, “I swear it.”

“Louder,” he insisted; “repeat: ‘I swear before God that there is nobody in that closet.’” She repeated the words without flinching.

“That will do,” said Monsieur de Merret coldly. After a moment, he remarked, “You have a fine piece of work there, which I’ve never seen before,” examining the ebony and silver crucifix.

“I found it at Duvivier’s; last year, when that troop of Spanish prisoners passed through Vendôme, he bought it from a Spanish monk.”

“Indeed,” said Monsieur de Merret, hanging the crucifix back on its nail, and he rang for Rosalie.

He waited for her to arrive. “Go to bed, all of you,” he instructed, beckoning Jean, his coachman and confidential servant, to come close. He whispered, “When they’re all asleep—mind, asleep—you understand?—come down and tell me.”

Monsieur de Merret kept his gaze on his wife while giving orders, returning to her at the fireside to discuss the billiards game and the club’s discussions. When Rosalie returned, she found them conversing amiably.

Not long before, Monsieur de Merret had had new ceilings installed in all the reception rooms on the ground floor. Plaster was scarce in Vendôme, and he had ordered a considerable quantity, knowing he could sell any excess. This circumstance inspired his plan.

“Gorenflot is here, sir,” Rosalie whispered.

“Tell him to come in,” he replied aloud.

Madame de Merret paled at the sight of the mason.

“Gorenflot,” said her husband, “go fetch some bricks from the coach-house; bring enough to wall up the cupboard door; you can use the leftover plaster as cement.” Then, pulling Rosalie and the mason close, he whispered, “Listen, Gorenflot, you’ll sleep here tonight; tomorrow morning, I’ll provide you a passport to take you abroad to a place I’ll specify. I’ll give you six thousand francs for your journey. You must live in that town for ten years; if you don’t like it, you may settle elsewhere, but it must be in the same country. Go through Paris and wait there until I join you. I’ll give you an agreement for six thousand francs more, to be paid upon your return, provided you fulfill the conditions of the bargain. In return, you must keep silent about what you do tonight. Rosalie, I’ll secure ten thousand francs for you, which won’t be paid until your wedding day, contingent on your marrying Gorenflot; but to marry, you must remain silent. If not, no wedding gift!”

“Rosalie,” Madame de Merret said, “come and brush my hair.”

Her husband quietly paced the room, keeping an eye on the door, the mason, and his wife, without displaying any suspicion. Gorenflot made some noise. Madame de Merret seized a moment when he was unloading bricks to say to Rosalie: “My dear child, I’ll give you a thousand francs a year if you tell Gorenflot to leave a crack at the bottom.” Then she added casually, “You’d better help him.”

Monsieur and Madame de Merret remained silent while Gorenflot walled up the door. This silence was intentional on the husband’s part; he didn’t want to give his wife the chance to say anything ambiguous. On Madame de Merret’s side, it was either pride or prudence. When the wall was half built, the cunning mason took advantage of his master’s back being turned to break one of the two panes in the top of the door with his pick. Madame de Merret understood that Rosalie had spoken to Gorenflot. They all three then saw the face of a dark, gloomy-looking man with black hair and fiery eyes.

Before her husband turned around, the poor woman nodded to the stranger, signaling “Hope.”

At four o’clock, as dawn broke in September, the work was completed. The mason was placed in charge of Jean, and Monsieur de Merret slept in his wife’s room.

The next morning, he casually mentioned, “Oh, by the way, I must go to the Maire for the passport.” He donned his hat, took a few steps toward the door, paused, and grabbed the crucifix. His wife trembled with joy.

“He will go to Duvivier’s,” she thought.

As soon as he left, Madame de Merret rang for Rosalie and cried in a terrible voice, “The pick! Bring the pick! We must work. I saw how Gorenflot did it yesterday; we have time to make a gap and build it up again.”

In an instant, Rosalie brought her mistress a cleaver; with an intensity beyond words, she began demolishing the wall. She had removed a few bricks when, turning to deliver a stronger blow, she saw Monsieur de Merret behind her. She fainted.

“Lay madame on her bed,” he said coldly.

Foreseeing what would happen in his absence, he had set this trap for his wife; he had merely written to the Maire and summoned Duvivier. The jeweler arrived just as the disorder in the room was being repaired.

“Duvivier,” Monsieur de Merret asked, “didn’t you buy any crucifixes from the Spaniards who passed through town?”

“No, monsieur.”

“Very well; thank you,” he said, casting a fierce glare at his wife. “Jean,” he added, turning to his valet, “you can serve my meals here in Madame de Merret’s room. She is ill, and I won’t leave her until she recovers.”

The cruel man remained in his wife’s room for twenty days. During the early days, when there was some noise in the closet, and Josephine wanted to intercede for the dying man, he said, without allowing her to speak, “You swore on the Cross that there was no one there.”

After this story, all the ladies rose from the table, breaking the spell Bianchon had cast over them. Some among them had shivered at the last words.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################