THE COMMISSION IN LUNACY

By Honore De Balzac

Translated By Clara Bell

DEDICATION

Dedicated to Monsieur le Contre-Amiral Bazoche,
Governor of the Isle of Bourbon, by the grateful writer.
DE BALZAC.

THE COMMISSION IN LUNACY

In 1828, about one o’clock one morning, two men left a large house in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore, near the Elysee-Bourbon. One was the famous doctor Horace Bianchon; the other, one of the most elegant men in Paris, the Baron de Rastignac. They were long-standing friends. Each had sent away his carriage; no cab was in sight; the night was fine and the pavement dry.

“We will walk as far as the boulevard,” said Eugene de Rastignac. “You can get a hackney cab at the club; there’s always one until daybreak. Come with me as far as my house.”

“With pleasure.”

“Well, and what have you to say about it?”

“About that woman?” the doctor answered coldly.

“There I recognize my Bianchon!” exclaimed Rastignac.

“Why, how?”

“Well, my dear fellow, you speak of the Marquise d’Espard as if she were a case for your hospital.”

“Do you want to know what I think, Eugene? If you throw over Madame de Nucingen for this Marquise, you will swap a one-eyed horse for a blind one.”

“Madame de Nucingen is six-and-thirty, Bianchon.”

“And this woman is three-and-thirty,” said the doctor quickly.

“Her worst enemies only say six-and-twenty.”

“My dear boy, when you really want to know a woman’s age, look at her temples and the tip of her nose. Cosmetics alter much, but not those witnesses to experience. When temples are flaccid, seamed, withered; when the tip of the nose shows minute specks like soot—then she’s over thirty. She may be handsome, witty, loving—whatever you please—but she is past thirty, arriving at maturity. I do not blame men who attach themselves to such women; only, a man of your distinction must not mistake a winter pippin for a little summer apple. Love never studies registers; no one loves a woman because she is handsome or ugly, stupid or clever; we love because we love.”

“Well, for my part, I love for quite other reasons. She is Marquise d’Espard; she was a Blamont-Chauvry; she is the fashion; she has soul; her foot is as pretty as the Duchesse de Berri’s; she has perhaps a hundred thousand francs a year—some day, perhaps, I may marry her! In short, she will put me into a position to pay my debts.”

“I thought you were rich,” interrupted Bianchon.

“Bah! I have twenty thousand francs a year—just enough to keep up my stables. I was thoroughly done, my dear fellow, in that Nucingen business; I will tell you about that. I have got my sisters married; that is the clearest profit since we last met; and I would rather have them provided for than five hundred thousand francs a year. No, what would you have me do? I am ambitious. To what can Madame de Nucingen lead? A year more and I shall be shelved, stuck like a married man. I have all the discomforts of marriage and of single life, without the advantages of either; a false position to which every man must come who remains tied too long to the same apron-string.”

“So you think you will come upon a treasure here?” said Bianchon. “Your Marquise, my dear fellow, does not hit my fancy at all.”

“Your liberal opinions blur your eyesight. If Madame d’Espard were a Madame Rabourdin...”

“Listen to me. Noble or simple, she would still have no soul; she would still be a perfect type of selfishness. Take my word for it, medical men are used to judge people and things; the sharpest of us read the soul while we study the body. Despite that pretty boudoir where we have spent this evening, despite the magnificence of the house, it is quite possible that Madame la Marquise is in debt.”

“What makes you think so?”

“I do not assert it; I am supposing. She talked of her soul as Louis XVIII used to talk of his heart. I tell you this: that fragile fair woman, with her chestnut hair, who pities herself that she may be pitied, has an iron constitution, an appetite like a wolf’s, and the strength and cowardice of a tiger. Gauze, silk, and muslin were never more cleverly twisted round a lie! Ecco.”

“Bianchon, you frighten me! You have learned a good many things, then, since we lived in the Maison Vauquer?”

“Yes, since then, my boy, I have seen puppets, both dolls and manikins. I know something of the ways of fine ladies whose bodies we attend to, saving that which is dearest to them—their child, if they love it—or their pretty faces, which they worship. A man spends his nights by their pillow, wearing himself to death to spare them the slightest loss of beauty; he succeeds, keeps their secret, and they send to ask for his bill and think it horribly exorbitant. Who saved them? Nature. Far from recommending him, they speak ill of him, fearing lest he should become the physician of their best friends.

“My dear fellow, those women you call ‘angels’ I have seen stripped of the little grimaces under which they hide their souls, and of the frippery under which they disguise their defects—without manners and without stays; they are not beautiful.

“We saw a great deal of mud, a great deal of dirt, under the waters of the world when we were aground for a time on the shoals of the Maison Vauquer. What we saw there was nothing. Since I have gone into high society, I have seen monsters dressed in satin, Michonneaus in white gloves, Poirets bedizened with orders, fine gentlemen doing more usurious business than old Gobseck! To the shame of mankind, when I wished to shake hands with Virtue, I found her shivering in a loft, persecuted by calumny, half-starving on fifteen hundred francs a year, regarded as crazy or eccentric.

“In short, my dear boy, the Marquise is a woman of fashion, and I have a particular horror of that kind. Do you want to know why? A woman who has a lofty soul, fine taste, gentle wit, a warm heart, and who lives simply, has no chance of being the fashion. Ergo: a woman of fashion and a man in power are analogous; but the difference is this: the qualities by which a man raises himself ennoble him; whereas the qualities by which a woman gains power for a day are hideous vices; she belies her nature, hides her character, and to live the militant life of the world she must have iron strength under a frail appearance.

“I, as a physician, know that a sound stomach excludes a good heart. Your woman of fashion feels nothing; her rage for pleasure springs from a craving to heat her cold nature, a longing for excitement like an old man standing night after night by the footlights at the opera. As she has more brain than heart, she sacrifices genuine passion and true friends to her triumph, as a general sends his most devoted subalterns to the front to win a battle. The woman of fashion ceases to be a woman; she is neither mother, wife, nor lover. She is, medically speaking, sex in the brain. And your Marquise has all the characteristics of this monstrosity: the beak of a bird of prey, the clear cold eye, the gentle voice—she is polished as steel, she touches everything except the heart.”

“There is some truth in what you say, Bianchon.”

“Some truth?” replied Bianchon. “It is all true. Do you suppose I was not struck by the insulting politeness by which she made me measure the imaginary distance her noble birth sets between us? That I did not feel the deepest pity for her cat-like civilities when I remembered what her object was? A year hence she will not write one word to do me the slightest service, and this evening she pelted me with smiles, believing I can influence my uncle Popinot, on whom the success of her case—”

“Would you rather she should have played the fool with you, my dear fellow?—I accept your diatribe against women of fashion; but you are beside the mark. I should always prefer for a wife a Marquise d’Espard to the most devout and devoted creature on earth. Marry an angel! you would have to go and bury your happiness in the country! The wife of a politician is a governing machine, a contrivance that makes compliments and courtesies. She is the most important and faithful tool an ambitious man can use; a friend who may compromise herself without mischief, and whom he may belie without harm. Fancy Mahomet in Paris in the nineteenth century! His wife would be a Rohan, a Duchesse de Chevreuse of the Fronde, as keen and flattering as an Ambassadress, as wily as Figaro. Your loving wives lead nowhere; a woman of the world leads to everything; she is the diamond with which a man cuts every window when he lacks the golden key. Leave humdrum virtues to the humdrum; ambitious vices to the ambitious.

“Besides, do you imagine the love of a Duchesse de Langeais or de Maufrigneuse, or of a Lady Dudley, does not bestow immense pleasure? If only you knew how much value the cold, severe style of such a woman gives to the smallest evidence of affection! What a delight to see a periwinkle piercing through the snow! A smile from below a fan contradicts the reserve of an assumed attitude, and is worth all the unbridled tenderness of your middle-class women with their mortgaged devotion; for, in love, devotion is nearly akin to speculation.

“And then, a woman of fashion, a Blamont-Chauvry, has her virtues too: fortunes, power, effect, a certain contempt of all that is beneath her—”

“Thank you!” said Bianchon.

“Old curmudgeon!” laughed Rastignac. “Come—do not be so common, do like your friend Desplein; be a Baron, a Knight of Saint-Michel; become a peer of France, and marry your daughters to dukes.”

“I! May the five hundred thousand devils—”

“Come, come! Can you be superior only in medicine? Really, you distress me...”

“I hate that sort of people; I long for a revolution to deliver us from them forever.”

“And so, my dear Robespierre of the lancet, you will not go tomorrow to your uncle Popinot?”

“Yes, I will,” said Bianchon; “for you I would go to hell to fetch water...”

“My good friend, you really touch me. I have sworn that a commission shall sit on the Marquis. Why, here is even a long-saved tear to thank you.”

“But,” Bianchon went on, “I do not promise to succeed as you wish with Jean-Jules Popinot. You do not know him. However, I will take him to see your Marquise the day after tomorrow; she may get round him if she can. I doubt it. If all the truffles, all the Duchesses, all the mistresses, and all the charmers in Paris were there in full bloom; if the King promised him the Prairie, and the Almighty gave him the Order of Paradise with the revenues of Purgatory, not one of all these powers would induce him to transfer a single straw from one saucer of his scales to the other. He is a judge, as Death is Death.”

They had reached the office of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, at the corner of the Boulevard des Capucines.

“Here you are at home,” Bianchon laughed, as he pointed to the ministerial residence. “And here is my carriage,” he added, calling a hackney cab. “And these—express our fortune.”

“You will be happy at the bottom of the sea, while I am still struggling with tempests on the surface till I sink and go to ask you for a corner in your grotto, old fellow!”

“Till Saturday,” replied Bianchon.

“Agreed,” said Rastignac. “And you promise me Popinot?”

“I will do all my conscience will allow. Perhaps this appeal for a commission covers some little dramorama, to use a word of our good bad times.”

“Poor Bianchon! he will never be anything but a good fellow,” said Rastignac to himself as the cab drove off.

“Rastignac has given me the most difficult negotiation,” thought Bianchon as he rose next morning, remembering the delicate commission intrusted to him. “However, I have never asked a service of my uncle in Court, and have paid more than a thousand visits gratis for him. And, after all, we are not apt to mince matters between ourselves. He will say Yes or No, and there an end.”

After this, the famous physician bent his steps at seven in the morning towards the Rue du Fouarre, where dwelt Monsieur Jean-Jules Popinot, judge of the Lower Court of the Department of the Seine. The Rue du Fouarre—an old word meaning straw—was once, in the thirteenth century, the most important street in Paris. There stood the Schools of the University, where Abelard and Gerson were heard. It is now one of the dirtiest streets of the Twelfth Arrondissement, the poorest quarter of Paris, where two-thirds of the population lack fuel in winter, many children are left at the Foundling, many beggars go to the poorhouse, many rag-pickers haunt the corners, many decrepit old folks sun themselves against walls, and many delinquents go to the police courts.

Halfway down this damp street, where a gutter carries blackened waters from some dye-works to the Seine, there is an old house, restored no doubt under Francis I, built of bricks held by a few courses of masonry. Its front wall bellies under the first floor, crushed by the floors above, but upheld by the ground floor. At first it seems as if the piers between the windows must give way, but one perceives that the old bricks and time-eaten stones preserve their center of gravity.

At every season the solid piers of the ground floor wear the yellow tone and the damp sweating surface of old stone. The passerby feels chilled near this wall, where worn corner-stones ineffectually shelter him from wheels. As in houses built before carriages, the doorway vault forms a very low archway like the barbican of a prison. To the right of this entrance are three windows protected by close iron gratings; the panes are dirty and dusty; to the left are two similar windows, one sometimes open, exposing the porter, his wife, and children—swarming, working, cooking, eating, and screaming—in a floored and wainscoted room where everything is dropping to pieces, into which you descend two steps—a depth hinting at the gradual elevation of Paris soil.

If on a rainy day a foot-passenger takes refuge under the long vault with projecting lime-washed beams leading from the door to the staircase, he will pause and look at the interior. To the left is a square garden-plot of not more than four long steps in each direction: black soil, trellises bereft of vines, where papers collect, old rags, potsherds, bits of mortar fallen from the roof; a barren ground where time has shed on the walls and on the trunks and branches of the trees a powdery deposit like soot. The two parts of the house, set at a right angle, draw light from this garden-court shut in by two adjoining houses built on wooden piers, decrepit and ready to fall, where on each floor grotesque evidence appears of the craft pursued by some lodger. Here long poles hang with immense skeins of dyed worsted out to dry; there, on ropes, clean shirts dance; higher up, on a shelf, volumes display freshly marbled edges; women sing, husbands whistle, children shout; a carpenter saws, a copper-turner makes metal screech; industries combine to produce distracting noise.

The general decoration of this passage—neither courtyard, garden, nor vaulted way, though a little of all—consists of wooden pillars on square stone blocks forming arches. Two archways open onto the little garden; two others, facing the front gateway, lead to a wooden staircase with an iron balustrade once a miracle of smith’s work; the worn steps creak. The entrance to each flat has an architrave dark with dirt, grease, and dust, and outer doors covered with Utrecht velvet set with brass nails, once gilt, in a diamond pattern. These relics of splendor show that in Louis XIV’s time the house was the residence of some councillor to the Parlement, some rich priest, or some treasurer of ecclesiastical revenue. But these vestiges of former luxury bring a smile by the contrast of past and present.

M. Jean-Jules Popinot lived on the first floor, where gloom natural to first floors in Paris was increased by the street’s narrowness. This tenement was known throughout the twelfth arrondissement, which Providence had blessed with this lawyer, as it gives a beneficent plant to cure or alleviate every malady. Here is a sketch of the man whom the brilliant Marquise d’Espard hoped to fascinate.

M. Popinot, as befits a magistrate, was always dressed in black—a style which made him ridiculous to those judging by surface. Men who insist on the dignity of black ought to devote themselves to constant and minute care of person; but Popinot was incapable of forcing himself to the puritanical cleanliness black demands. His trousers, always threadbare, looked like camlet—the stuff of attorneys’ gowns; his habitual stoop had creased them into whitish, rusty, or shiny lines, betraying sordid avarice or unheeding poverty. His coarse worsted stockings were twisted in ill-shaped shoes. His linen had the tawny tinge of long sojourn in a wardrobe, showing that the late Madame Popinot had a mania for much linen; perhaps in the Flemish fashion she washed only twice a year. The old man’s coat and waistcoat matched the rest. He always had the luck of his carelessness; the first day he put on a new coat he unfailingly matched it to the rest by staining it with incredible promptitude. He waited till his housekeeper told him his hat was too shabby before buying a new one. His necktie was crumpled and starchless; he never set his dog-eared collar straight after his judge’s bands had disordered it. He took no care of his gray hair and shaved but twice a week. He never wore gloves and usually kept his hands stuffed into empty pockets; the soiled pocket-holes, almost always torn, completed his slovenliness.

Anyone who knows the Palais de Justice, where every variety of black attire may be studied, can imagine Popinot. The habit of sitting for days modifies the body as the fatigue of hearing interminable pleadings tells on a magistrate’s face. Shut up in courts ridiculously small, devoid of architectural dignity, and vitiating the air, a Paris judge acquires a countenance puckered by reflection and weariness; his complexion turns pallid, earthy or greenish. In short, in time the most blooming young man becomes an “inasmuch” machine—an instrument applying the Code with the indifference of clockwork.

Thus, nature had not favored Popinot’s exterior; his life as a lawyer had not improved it. His frame was graceless and angular. Thick knees, huge feet, and broad hands contrasted with a priest-like face vaguely resembling a calf’s head—meek to unmeaningness, little brightened by divergent bloodless eyes divided by a straight flat nose, surmounted by a flat forehead, flanked by enormous ears, flabby and graceless. Thin, weak hair showed baldness through irregular partings.

One feature, however, commended this face to the physiognomist. He had a mouth whose lips divine kindness lent sweetness. They were wholesome, full, red, finely wrinkled, sinuous, mobile—expressive of noble feelings; lips that spoke to the heart and proclaimed intelligence, lucidity, a gift of second-sight, and a heavenly temper; and one would judge him wrongly if assessing only his sloping forehead, fireless eyes, and shambling gait. His life matched his face: full of secret labor, hiding the virtue of a saint. His superior knowledge of law recommended him when Napoleon reorganized it in 1808 and 1811; by Cambaceres’ advice he was one of the first named to the Imperial High Court of Justice at Paris. Popinot was no schemer. Whenever any demand for an appointment was made, the Minister overlooked Popinot, who never set foot in the Chancellor’s house. From the High Court he was sent down to the Common Court, pushed to the lowest rung by active men. He was appointed supernumerary judge. There was a general outcry among lawyers: “Popinot a supernumerary!” Such injustice shocked the legal world—attorneys, registrars—all but Popinot himself, who made no complaint. After the first clamour, everybody was satisfied that all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds—the legal world. Popinot remained supernumerary judge until the day when the most famous Great Seal under the Restoration avenged the oversights of the Empire’s Chief Justices. After twelve years as a supernumerary, M. Popinot would no doubt die a puisne judge of the Court of the Seine.

To account for the obscure fortunes of one of the superior legal men, we must enter into details revealing his life and showing some wheels of the great machine called Justice. M. Popinot was classed by three Presidents who successively controlled the Court of the Seine as the stuff of which judges are made. Thus classified, he did not achieve the reputation his labors deserved. Just as a painter is fenced into landscape or portrait by critics who assume ganglions in every brain, so Popinot’s fate was sealed, hedged to do a particular kind of work. Magistrates, attorneys, pleaders—those who pasture on the legal common—distinguish two elements in every case: law and equity. Equity grows from facts; law is the application of principles to facts. A man may be right in equity but wrong in law, without blame to the judge. Between conscience and facts is a gulf of determining reasons unknown to the judge, but which condemn or legitimize the act. A judge’s duty is to adapt facts to principles, to judge infinite variety by a fixed standard.

France employs about six thousand judges; no generation has six thousand great men, much less in the legal profession. Popinot, in Parisian civilization, was just a very clever cadi who, by the character of his mind and by rubbing the letter of the law into the essence of facts, had learned to see the error of spontaneous, violent decisions. By judicial second-sight he could pierce the double casing of lies in which advocates hide a trial’s heart. He was a judge as the great Desplein was a surgeon; he probed consciences as the anatomist probed bodies. His life and habits led to an exact appreciation of secret thoughts by thorough study of facts.

He sifted a case as Cuvier sifted the earth’s crust. Like that great thinker, he proceeded from deduction to deduction before drawing conclusions, reconstructing a conscience’s past career as Cuvier reconstructed an Anoplotherium. Considering a brief he would often wake at night, startled by a gleam of truth. Struck by deep injustice—which is the end of contests where everything favors the rogue—he often favored equity over law in cases of divination. Hence his colleagues called him impractical; his two-line deductions made deliberations lengthy. When Popinot perceived their dislike he gave his opinion briefly; it was said he was not a good judge in this class; but as his discrimination was remarkable, his opinion lucid, and his penetration profound, he was considered apt for the laborious duties of an examining judge. So he remained most of his career.

Although his qualifications fitted him for difficult functions and he had a reputation in criminal law, the kindness of his heart constantly tortured him, and he was pinched between conscience and pity. The services of an examining judge are better paid than civil judges’ but not tempting; they are onerous. Popinot, modest and virtuous, without ambition, an indefatigable worker, never complained; he sacrificed his tastes and compassionate soul to the public good and allowed himself to be transported to the noisome pools of criminal examinations, where he showed himself severe and beneficent. His clerk sometimes gave accused men money for tobacco or a warm garment as he led them back to the Souriciere, the House of Detention. He knew how to be inflexible and charitable. No one extracted a confession so easily without judicial trickery. He had the acumen of an observer. This man, apparently foolishly good-natured, simple, and absent-minded, could guess all the cunning of a prison wag, unmask the astutest street-hussy, and subdue a scoundrel. Unusual circumstances had sharpened his perspicacity; but to relate them we must intrude on his domestic history, for in him the judge was the social side of the man; another, greater and less known, existed within.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Twelve years before this story begins, in 1816, during a terrible scarcity that coincided with the Allies’ stay in France, Popinot was named President of the Commission Extraordinary to distribute food to the poor of his neighborhood, just as he planned to leave the Rue du Fouarre, which he and his wife disliked. The great lawyer and clear-sighted criminal judge—whose superiority seemed aberrant to colleagues—had for five years watched legal results without perceiving their causes. As he climbed into lofts, saw poverty, and studied the desperate necessities that drive the poor to crime, compassion filled him. The judge became the Saint Vincent de Paul of these grown children, these suffering toilers.

The transformation was not immediate. Charity has temptations: it consumes a saint’s purse as roulette consumes a gambler’s. Popinot went from misery to misery; after a year of lifting rags that cover public pauperism, he became the Providence of that quarter. He joined the Benevolent Committee and the Charity Organization. Wherever gratuitous service was needed he was ready, doing everything without fuss, like the man with the short cloak who spends his life carrying soup where folk starve.

Popinot acted on a larger circle and higher sphere: he prevented crime, gave work to the unemployed, found refuge for the helpless, distributed aid with discernment where danger threatened, counseled widows, protected homeless children, and became the sleeping partner of small traders. No one at the Courts or in Paris knew of this secret life. There are virtues so splendid they necessitate obscurity; men hide them under a bushel. Those he succored, hard at work all day and tired at night, were little able to sing his praises; theirs was the gracelessness of children who can never pay because they owe too much. There is such compulsory ingratitude; but who that has sown good to reap gratitude can think itself great?

By the end of his second year of apostolic work, Popinot had turned the storeroom at the bottom of his house into a parlor lighted by three iron-barred windows. The walls and ceiling were whitewashed; the furniture consisted of wooden benches like those in schools, a clumsy cupboard, a walnut writing-table, and an armchair. In the cupboard were his registers of donations, his tickets for orders for bread, and his diary. He kept his ledger like a tradesman, that he might not be ruined by kindness. All the neighborhood’s sorrows were entered and numbered in a book, where each had its little account, as merchants’ customers have theirs. When help was in question he could command information from the police.

Lavienne, a man made for his master, was his aide-de-camp. He redeemed or renewed pawn-tickets and visited the districts most threatened with famine while his master was in court.

From four till seven in the morning in summer, from six till nine in winter, this room was full of women, children, and paupers while Popinot gave audience. There was no need for a stove in winter; the crowd warmed the air; Lavienne strewed straw on the wet floor. By long use the benches were as polished as varnished mahogany; at a man’s shoulder height the wall bore a dark coating left by rags and tattered clothes. The poor loved Popinot so much that when they assembled before his door was opened, before daybreak on a winter morning, the women warming themselves with foot-brasiers, the men swinging their arms for circulation, never a sound disturbed his sleep. Rag-pickers and other night toilers knew the house, and often saw a light burning in the lawyer’s private room at unholy hours. Even thieves, passing by, said, “That is his house,” and respected it. The morning he gave to the poor, the mid-day hours to criminals, the evening to legal work.

Thus Popinot’s gift of observation was bifrons: he could perceive a pauper’s virtues—good feelings nipped, fine actions in embryo, unrecognized self-sacrifice—just as he could read at the bottom of a man’s conscience the faintest outlines of crime and infer the rest.

Popinot’s inherited fortune was a thousand crowns a year. His wife, sister to M. Bianchon Senior, a doctor at Sancerre, had brought him about twice as much. She, dying five years earlier, had left her fortune to him. As a supernumerary judge’s salary was small, and Popinot had been a fully salaried judge only for four years, one may guess his parsimony regarding himself, given his small means and great beneficence. Besides, such indifference to dress as stamped Popinot—an absent-minded air—seemed a mark of scientific pursuit. To complete the portrait: Popinot was one of the few judges of the Court of the Seine on whom the Legion of Honor ribbon had not been conferred.

Such was the man instructed by the President of the Second Chamber of the Court—to which Popinot had belonged since his reinstatement—to examine the Marquis d’Espard at his wife’s request for a Commission in Lunacy.

The Rue du Fouarre, where so many unhappy wretches swarmed in the early morning, would be deserted by nine o’clock and as gloomy and squalid as ever. Bianchon put his horse to a trot to find his uncle amid his business. He smiled at the contrast the judge’s appearance would make in Madame d’Espard’s room and promised himself he would persuade Popinot to dress in a way that should not be ridiculous.

“If only my uncle has a new coat!” thought Bianchon as he turned into the Rue du Fouarre, where a pale light shone from the parlor windows. “I shall do well to talk that over with Lavienne.”

At the sound of wheels half a score of startled paupers came out from under the gateway and took off their hats on recognizing Bianchon; the doctor, who treated gratuitously the sick recommended by the lawyer, was not less well known to the poor.

Bianchon found his uncle in the middle of the parlor, where benches were occupied by grotesquely dressed patients whose attitudes a draughtsman might have composed as a fine picture. There was the rugged countenance of an old man with a white beard and apostolic head—Saint Peter ready to hand; a young woman suckled her newborn while another of about five stood between her knees, her white bosom gleaming amid rags, the baby with transparent flesh-tints, and the brother promising a future street arab—pathos contrasted with faces crimson with cold. An old woman had the repulsive look of rebellious pauperism, eager to avenge past woes. A young workman, weak and indolent, had a bright intelligent eye revealing faculties crushed by necessity. The majority were women; husbands gone to work left them to plead the family’s cause with the ingenuity typical of the woman of the people. You would have seen torn bandanas, mud-deep skirts, ragged kerchiefs, worn jackets, but eyes that burned like live coals. It was a horrible assemblage, raising disgust at first, then terror when you perceived their resignation was a speculation on benevolence. The two tallow candles that lighted the parlor flickered in a fog caused by the fetid atmosphere.

The magistrate himself was not the least picturesque. He wore a rusty cotton night-cap; having no cravat his neck was visible, red with cold and wrinkled, contrasting with the threadbare collar of his old dressing-gown. His worn face had the half-stupid look of absorbed attention. His lips were puckered like a drawstring bag. His knitted brows seemed to bear the burden of so many confided sorrows: he felt, analyzed, and judged them all. As watchful as a Jewish money-lender, he never raised his eyes from his books and registers but to look into the hearts of those he examined with the flashing glance by which a miser expresses alarm.

Lavienne, behind his master ready to carry out orders, served as a sort of police and welcomed newcomers, encouraging them to overcome shyness. When the doctor appeared there was a stir on the benches. Lavienne turned and was strangely surprised to see Bianchon.

“Ah! It is you, old boy!” exclaimed Popinot, stretching. “What brings you so early?”

“I was afraid you might make an official visit about which I wished to speak to you before I could see you.”

“Well,” said the lawyer, addressing a stout little woman close to him, “if you do not tell me what you want, I cannot guess it, child.”

“Make haste,” said Lavienne. “Do not waste other people’s time.”

The woman, red and speaking low, said she had a green-grocery truck, her last baby to nurse, and owed for his keep. She had hidden her little money.

Popinot guessed the sequel. He asked names: “La Pomponne” and husband “Toupinet,” and, turning over his register, found the husband imprisoned for debt in the Rue du Petit-Banquier. The woman needed ten francs to buy stock. Lavienne took ten francs from a large bag and handed them to her while Popinot noted the loan. Seeing the thrill of delight that made the poor hawker tremble, Bianchon understood her apprehensions.

“You next,” said Lavienne to an old man with a white beard.

Bianchon drew Lavienne aside and asked how long this audience would last.

“Monsieur has had two hundred persons this morning, and there are eight to be turned off,” said Lavienne. “You will have time to pay your early visit, sir.”

“Here, my boy,” said Popinot, taking Horace by the arm; “here are two addresses near this—one in the Rue de Seine, and the other in the Rue de l’Arbalete. Go there at once. Rue de Seine, a young girl has just asphyxiated herself; and Rue de l’Arbalete, you will find a man to remove to your hospital. I will wait breakfast for you.”

Bianchon returned an hour later. The Rue du Fouarre was deserted; day was dawning; his uncle had gone up to his rooms; the last poor wretch whose misery the judge had relieved was departing, and Lavienne’s money bag was empty.

“Well, how are they going on?” asked the old lawyer as the doctor came in.

“The man is dead,” replied Bianchon; “the girl will get over it.”

Since a woman’s eye and hand had been lacking, Popinot’s flat bore an aspect in harmony with its master. The indifference of a man absorbed in one dominant idea left its stamp on everything: dust unconquerable, objects adapted to wrong purposes, papers in flower vases, empty ink-bottles on tables, plates forgotten, matches used as tapers, drawers half-turned out—chaos from plans for order never carried out. The private room, disordered by incessant rummage, bore witness to his unresting pace. The bookcase looked sacked; books were scattered, some open, others face down; registers of proceedings laid on the floor in rows; the floor had not been polished for two years.

Tables and shelves were covered with ex votos, offerings of the grateful poor: a pair of blue glass jars with two glass balls of many-colored fragments, frames of artificial flowers with Popinot’s initials surrounded by hearts and everlasting blooms, boxes of elaborate cabinet work, letter-weights carved in convict style. These masterpieces of patience, enigmas of gratitude, and withered bouquets gave the room the air of a toyshop. He used these works as hiding-places for bills, worn-out pens, scraps of paper. All these pathetic witnesses were thick with dust, dingy, and faded.

Some beautifully stuffed birds, eaten by moth, perched amid the trumpery, presided over by an Angora cat—Madame Popinot’s pet, restored to her no doubt by some impecunious naturalist who repaid charity with a perennial treasure. A local artist had painted portraits of M. and Madame Popinot. Even in the bedroom there were embroidered pin-cushions, cross-stitch landscapes, and elaborately cockled paper crosses.

The window-curtains were black with smoke, the hangings colorless. Between the fireplace and the large square table where the magistrate worked, the cook had set two cups of coffee on a small table and two mahogany horsehair armchairs awaited the uncle and nephew. As daylight, darkened by the windows, could not penetrate this corner, the cook had left two dips burning, their unsnuffed wicks producing a red light like a miser’s slow-burning candle.

“My dear uncle, you ought to wrap yourself more warmly when you go down to that parlor.”

“I cannot bear to keep them waiting, poor souls! Well, and what do you want of me?”

“I have come to ask you to dine tomorrow with the Marquise d’Espard.”

“A relation of ours?” asked Popinot, with genuine absence of mind that made Bianchon laugh.

“No, uncle; the Marquise d’Espard is a high and puissant lady who has laid before the Courts a petition desiring that a Commission in Lunacy should sit on her husband, and you are appointed----”

“And you want me to dine with her! Are you mad?” said the lawyer, taking up the code of proceedings. “Here, read this article prohibiting any magistrate’s eating or drinking in the house of either party in a case he is to decide between. Let her come and see me, your Marquise, if she has anything to say to me. I was to go tomorrow to examine her husband after working the case up to-night.”

He rose, took up a packet under a weight, read its title, and said:

“Here is the affidavit. Since you take an interest in this high and puissant lady, let us see what she wants.”

Popinot wrapped his dressing-gown around him, which constantly slipped, leaving his chest bare; he sopped his bread in the half-cold coffee and opened the petition, reading and commenting now and then, with Bianchon joining in.

The petition began: “Madame Jeanne Clementine Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, wife of M. Charles Maurice Marie Andoche, Comte de Negrepelisse, Marquis d’Espard”—a good family—“landowner, the said Mme. d’Espard living in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore, No. 104, and the said M. d’Espard in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, No. 22,”—to be sure, the President told me he lived in this part of town—“having for her solicitor Maitre Desroches”—Desroches! a pettifogging jobber looked down on by his brethren—”

“Poor fellow!” said Bianchon. “Unluckily he has no money, and he rushes round like the devil in holy water.”

“‘Has the honor to submit to you, Monsieur the President, that for a year past the moral and intellectual powers of her husband, M. d’Espard, have undergone so serious a change that at the present day they have reached the state of dementia and idiocy provided for by Article 448 of the Civil Code, and require the remedies set forth by that article, for the security of his fortune and his person, and to guard the interest of his children whom he keeps to live with him.

“‘That, in point of fact, the mental condition of M. d’Espard, which for some years has given grounds for alarm based on the system he has pursued in the management of his affairs, has reached during the last twelvemonth a deplorable depth of depression; that his infirm will was the first thing to show results; and that its effete state leaves M. the Marquis d’Espard exposed to all the perils of his incompetency, as is proved by the following facts:

“‘For a long time all the income accruing from M. d’Espard’s estates are paid, without any reasonable cause, or even temporary advantage, into the hands of an old woman, whose repulsive ugliness is generally remarked on, named Madame Jeanrenaud, living sometimes in Paris, Rue de la Vrilliere, No. 8, sometimes at Villeparisis, near Claye, in the Department of Seine et Marne, and for the benefit of her son, aged thirty-six, an officer in the ex-Imperial Guards, whom the Marquis d’Espard has placed by his influence in the King’s Guards, as Major in the First Regiment of Cuirassiers. These two persons, who in 1814 were in extreme poverty, have since purchased house-property of considerable value; among other items, recently a large house in the Grand Rue Verte, where the said Jeanrenaud is laying out considerable sums to settle there with the woman Jeanrenaud, intending to marry: these sums amount already to more than a hundred thousand francs. The marriage has been arranged by the intervention of M. d’Espard with his banker, one Mongenod, whose niece he has asked in marriage for the said Jeanrenaud, promising to use his influence to procure him the title and dignity of baron. This has in fact been secured by His Majesty’s letters patent, dated December 29th of last year, at the request of the Marquis d’Espard, as can be proved by His Excellency the Keeper of the Seals, if the Court should require his testimony.

“‘That no reason, not even such as morality and the law would concur in disapproving, can justify the influence which the said Mme. Jeanrenaud exerts over M. d’Espard, who, indeed, sees her very seldom; nor account for his strange affection for the said Baron Jeanrenaud, Major with whom he has little intercourse. And yet their power is so considerable that whenever they need money, if only to gratify a whim, this lady or her son—’ Heh, heh! _No reason even such as morality and the law concur in disapproving!_ What does the clerk or the attorney mean to insinuate?” said Popinot.

Bianchon laughed.

“‘This lady, or her son, obtain whatever they ask of the Marquis d’Espard without demur; and if he has not ready money, M. d’Espard draws bills to be paid by the said Mongenod, who has offered to give evidence to that effect for the petitioner.

“‘That, moreover, in further proof of these facts, lately, on the occasion of the renewal of the leases on the Espard estate, the farmers having paid a considerable premium for renewal, M. Jeanrenaud at once secured payment of it into his own hands.

“‘That the Marquis d’Espard parts with these sums so little of his own free-will that when he was spoken to on the subject he seemed to remember nothing of the matter; that whenever anybody of weight has questioned him as to his devotion to these two persons, his replies have shown so complete an absence of ideas and of sense of his own interests, that there obviously must be some occult cause at work to which the petitioner begs to direct the eye of justice, inasmuch as it is impossible but that this cause should be criminal, malignant, and wrongful, or else of a nature to come under medical jurisdiction; unless this influence is of the kind which constitutes an abuse of moral power—such as can only be described by the word possession—’

“The devil!” exclaimed Popinot. “What do you say to that, doctor? These are strange statements.”

“They might certainly,” said Bianchon, “be an effect of magnetic force.”

“Then do you believe in Mesmer’s nonsense, and his tub, and seeing through walls?”

“Yes, uncle,” said the doctor gravely. “As I heard you read that petition I thought of that. I assure you I have verified, in another sphere of action, several analogous facts proving the unlimited influence one man may acquire over another. Contrary to my brethren, I am convinced of the power of the will regarded as a motor force. All collusion and charlatanism apart, I have seen results of such a possession. Actions promised during sleep by a magnetized patient to the magnetizer have been scrupulously performed on waking. The will of one had become the will of the other.”

“Every kind of action?”

“Yes.”

“Even a criminal act?”

“Even a crime.”

“If it were not from you, I would not listen to such a thing.”

“I will make you witness it,” said Bianchon.

“Hm, hm,” muttered the lawyer. “But supposing that this so-called possession fell under this class of facts, it would be difficult to prove it as legal evidence.”

“If this woman Jeanrenaud is so hideously old and ugly, I do not see what other means of fascination she can have used,” observed Bianchon.

“But,” observed the lawyer, “in 1814, when this fascination is supposed to have taken place, this woman was fourteen years younger; if she had been connected with M. d’Espard ten years before that, these calculations take us back twenty-four years, to a time when the lady may have been young and pretty, and have won for herself and her son a power over M. d’Espard which some men do not know how to evade. Though the source of this power is reprehensible in justice’s sight, it is justifiable in nature. Madame Jeanrenaud may have been aggrieved by the marriage, probably about that time, between the Marquis d’Espard and Mademoiselle de Blamont-Chauvry, and at the bottom of all this may be nothing more than the rivalry of two women, since the Marquis had for a long time lived apart from Mme. d’Espard.”

“But her repulsive ugliness, uncle?”

“Power of fascination is in direct proportion to ugliness,” said the lawyer; “that is the old story. And then think of the smallpox, doctor. But to proceed.

“‘That so long ago as in 1815, to supply the sums required by these two persons, the Marquis d’Espard went with his two children to live in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, in rooms unworthy of his name and rank’—well, we may live as we please—‘that he keeps his two children there, the Comte Clement d’Espard and Vicomte Camille d’Espard, in a style of living quite unsuited to their prospects; that he often wants money, to such a point, that not long since the landlord, one Mariast, put in an execution on the furniture in the rooms; that when this execution was carried out in his presence, the Marquis d’Espard helped the bailiff, whom he treated like a man of rank, paying him all the marks of attention and respect he would have shown to a person of superior birth and dignity to himself.’”

The uncle and nephew glanced at each other and laughed.

“‘That, moreover, every act of his life, besides the facts with reference to the widow Jeanrenaud and the Baron Jeanrenaud, are those of a madman; that for nearly ten years he has given his thoughts exclusively to China, its customs, manners, and history; that he refers everything to a Chinese origin; that when questioned on the subject he confuses the events of the day and the business of yesterday with facts relating to China; that he censures the acts of the Government and the conduct of the King, though he is personally much attached to him, by comparing them with the politics of China;

“‘That this monomania has driven the Marquis d’Espard to conduct devoid of all sense: against the customs of men of rank, and, in opposition to his own professed ideas of the duties of the nobility, he has joined a commercial undertaking, for which he constantly draws bills which, as they fall due, threaten both his honor and his fortune, since they stamp him as a trader, and in default of payment may lead to his being declared insolvent; that these debts, owing to stationers, printers, lithographers, and print-colorists who have supplied materials for his publication, called A Picturesque History of China, now coming out in parts, are so heavy that these tradesmen have requested the petitioner to apply for a Commission in Lunacy to declare M. d’Espard incapable of managing his affairs, as the only way to preserve their own credit.’”

“The man is mad!” exclaimed Bianchon.

“You think so, do you?” said his uncle. “If you listen to only one bell, you hear only one sound.”

“But it seems to me----” said Bianchon.

“But it seems to me,” said Popinot, “that if any relation of mine wanted to get hold of the management of my affairs, and if, instead of being a humble lawyer whose colleagues can any day verify his condition, I were a duke of the realm, an attorney with a little cunning, like Desroches, might bring just such a petition against me.

“‘That his children’s education has been neglected for this monomania; and that he has taught them, against all rules of education, the facts of Chinese history, which contradict the tenets of the Catholic Church. He also has them taught the Chinese dialects.’”

“Here Desroches strikes me as funny,” said Bianchon.

“The petition is drawn up by his head-clerk Godeschal, who, as you know, is not strong in Chinese,” said the lawyer.

“‘That he often leaves his children destitute of the most necessary things; that the petitioner, notwithstanding her entreaties, can never see them; that the said Marquis d’Espard brings them to her only once a year; that, knowing the privations to which they are exposed, she makes vain efforts to give them the things most necessary for their existence, and which they require----’ Oh! Madame la Marquise, this is preposterous. By proving too much you prove nothing. My dear boy,” said the old man, laying the document on his knee, “where is the mother who ever lacked heart and wit and yearning so as to fall below the inspirations suggested by her animal instinct? A mother is as cunning to get at her children as a girl can be in a love intrigue. If your Marquise really wanted to give her children food and clothes, the Devil himself would not have hindered her, heh? That is rather too big a fable for an old lawyer to swallow! To proceed.

“‘That at the age the said children have now attained it is necessary that steps be taken to preserve them from the evil effects of such an education; that they should be provided for as beseems their rank, and that they should cease to have before their eyes the sad example of their father’s conduct;

“‘That there are proofs in support of these allegations which the Court can easily order to be produced. Many times has M. d’Espard spoken of the judge of the Twelfth Arrondissement as a mandarin of the third class; he often speaks of the professors of the College Henri IV. as “men of letters”’—and that offends them! ‘In speaking of the simplest things, he says, “They were not done so in China;” in the course of ordinary conversation he will sometimes allude to Madame Jeanrenaud, or to events which happened in the time of Louis XIV., and then sit plunged in the darkest melancholy; sometimes he fancies he is in China. Several of his neighbors, among others one Edme Becker, medical student, and Jean Baptiste Fremiot, a professor, living under the same roof, are of opinion, after frequent intercourse with the Marquis d’Espard, that his monomania regarding everything Chinese is the result of a scheme laid by the said Baron Jeanrenaud and the widow his mother to bring about the deadening of all the Marquis d’Espard’s mental faculties, since the only service which Mme. Jeanrenaud appears to render M. d’Espard is to procure him everything that relates to the Chinese Empire;

“‘Finally, that the petitioner is prepared to show to the Court that the moneys absorbed by the said Baron and Mme. Jeanrenaud between 1814 and 1828 amount to not less than one million francs.

“‘In confirmation of the facts herein set forth, the petitioner can bring the evidence of persons who are in the habit of seeing the Marquis d’Espard, whose names and professions are subjoined, many of whom have urged her to demand a commission in lunacy to declare M. d’Espard incapable of managing his own affairs, as being the only way to preserve his fortune from the effects of his maladministration and his children from his fatal influence.

“‘Taking all this into consideration, M. le President, and the affidavits subjoined, the petitioner desires that it may please you, inasmuch as the foregoing facts sufficiently prove the insanity and incompetency of the Marquis d’Espard herein described with his titles and residence, to order that, to the end that he may be declared incompetent by law, this petition and the documents in evidence may be laid before the King’s public prosecutor; and that you will charge one of the judges of this Court to make his report to you on any day you may be pleased to name, and thereupon to pronounce judgment,’ etc.

“And here,” said Popinot, “is the President’s order instructing me! Well, what does the Marquise d’Espard want with me? I know everything. But I shall go tomorrow with my registrar to see M. le Marquis, for this does not seem at all clear to me.”

“Listen, my dear uncle, I have never asked the least little favor of you that had to do with your legal functions; well, now I beg you to show Madame d’Espard the kindness her situation deserves. If she came here, you would listen to her?”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, go and listen to her in her own house. Madame d’Espard is a sickly, nervous, delicate woman who would faint in your rat-hole of a place. Go in the evening, instead of accepting her dinner, since the law forbids your eating or drinking at your client’s expense.”

“And does not the law forbid you from taking any legacy from your dead?” said Popinot, fancying irony on his nephew’s lips.

“Come, uncle, if it were only to enable you to get at the truth of this business, grant my request. You will come as the examining judge, since matters do not seem clear. Deuce take it! It is as necessary to cross-question the Marquise as it is to examine the Marquis.”

“You are right,” said the lawyer. “It is quite possible that it is she who is mad. I will go.”

“I will call for you. Write down in your engagement book: ‘Tomorrow evening at nine, Madame d’Espard.’” Good!” said Bianchon, seeing his uncle make a note of the engagement.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Next evening at nine Bianchon climbed his uncle’s dusty staircase and found him at work on a statement of some complicated judgment. The coat Lavienne had ordered had not arrived, so Popinot wore his old stained coat—the Popinot unadorned whose appearance made those laugh who did not know the secrets of his private life. Bianchon obtained permission to pull his cravat straight and button his coat; he hid the stains by crossing the breast with the right side over the left to display the new front of the cloth. But in a minute the judge rucked the coat up over his chest in the way he stuffed his hands into his pockets, obeying an irresistible habit. Thus the coat, deeply wrinkled in front and behind, made a sort of hump in the middle of the back, leaving a gap between waistcoat and trousers through which his shirt showed. Bianchon, to his regret, only discovered this crowning absurdity as his uncle entered the Marquise’s room.

A brief sketch of the lady before whom the doctor and judge now found themselves is necessary to understand her interview with Popinot.

Madame d’Espard had, for the last seven years, been very much the fashion in Paris, where Fashion can exalt and discard people at will. Since her husband separated from her in 1815, Madame d’Espard must have married about 1812; her children were therefore fifteen and thirteen. How had a mother of a family, about thirty-three by her register, remained the fashion? Fashion is capricious; it often promotes unlikely figures, and yet in Madame d’Espard it seemed to put on the airs of favoring youth.

The Marquise, who was thirty-three on paper, presented herself at evening salons as twenty-two. By what care, what artifice! Elaborate curls shaded her temples; she lived in twilight, affected illness to sit under light filtered through muslin, bathed in cold water, slept on horsehair mattresses with morocco-covered pillows to preserve her hair, ate little, drank water, and observed monastic regularity in the smallest actions of her life.

There are contemporaries—an elderly Polish grande dame is an example—who carry such regimens to extremes, using ice instead of water and subsisting on cold food, yet preserving youth and vivacity into extreme age. Whether Madame d’Espard knew such models or not, her regimen succeeded: her complexion was clear, her brow unwrinkled, her figure preserved the litheness and covered charms that secure a woman love. Her precautions, suggested by art and nature and perhaps experience, had combined into a system which confirmed the results. The Marquise was absolutely indifferent to everything that was not herself: men amused her, but none ever stirred the deep passions that wreck both natures. She knew neither hatred nor love. When offended, she avenged herself coldly, quietly, waiting for opportunity. She made no fuss and could, with two words, ruin a man.

She had parted from M. d’Espard with great satisfaction; he had taken with him two children who would have obstructed her pretensions. Her most intimate friends, and even casual admirers, seeing none of Cornelia’s jewels that betray a mother’s age, took her for quite a young woman. The two boys were as unknown as the northwest passage. M. d’Espard was thought an eccentric who deserted his wife without cause.

Mistress of herself at twenty-two and mistress of twenty-six thousand francs a year, the Marquise hesitated long before deciding her life’s course. Though she kept the house and carriage, she lived retired in 1816–18 while families recovered from political storms; her parents, advisors from the Faubourg Saint-Germain, urged that she live with them. In 1820 she roused herself, went to Court, appeared at parties, and entertained at home. From 1821 to 1827 she lived in great style and became noted for taste and dress; she fixed hours for visits and soon seated herself on a social throne formerly occupied by several great women whom she supplanted. The world knew little beyond this. She seemed destined to shine long like the sun near its setting.

The Marquise was intimate with a duchess famed for beauty and attachment to an exiled prince, with a foreign lady consulted by a keen Russian diplomat, and adopted maternally by an antiquated countess who shuffled the cards of politics. Thus Madame d’Espard gathered a covert but real influence to follow her fashionable sway. Her drawing-room acquired political individuality. “What do they say at Madame d’Espard’s?” became a significant question. Damaged politicians she had helped praised her diplomatic capacity. She had suggested words and ideas that had resonated broader than her circle. Principal figures came to play whist at her house.

She had qualities and defects; she was thought to be—and was—indiscreet. Her friendship seemed staunch; she worked persistently for protégés, caring less for patronage than influence. This conduct sprang from Vanity. Conquests and pleasure served her ends; she aimed at living at every point of life’s largest circle.

Among the young men who courted her were de Marsay and de Ronquerolles, de Montriveau, de la Roche-Hugon, de Serizy, Ferraud, Maxime de Trailles, de Listomere, the two Vandenesses, du Chatelet, and others. She often received men whose wives were not admitted, and ambitious men submitted to such terms. Two famous royalist bankers, de Nucingen and Ferdinand du Tillet, endured them. She had studied the strengths and weaknesses of Paris life so thoroughly that her conduct never gave a man an advantage over her. A compromising note or letter could have fetched an enormous price, yet none had been produced.

Her person served her designs; she had a youthful figure and a voice that could be soft or hard at will. She mastered the aristocratic pose that wipes out the past. She knew the art of setting a space between herself and any man who fancied familiarity. In conversation fine sentiments and noble resolutions seemed natural, but in reality she was all self and capable of blasting a clumsy negotiator even while compromising herself for her interest.

Rastignac, trying to attach himself to this woman, saw her as the cleverest of tools but was already being crushed by it. This young Condottiere of the brain, forced to duel constantly, had found a partner worthy of him. He saw ministerial prospects in her favor and was her tool until he could make her his—a perilous start.

The Hôtel d’Espard required a large household. Grand receptions were held on the ground floor; she lived on the first floor. The fine staircase, rooms fitted in the dignified style of Versailles, and the whole establishment spoke of immense fortune. When the judge saw the carriage gates open to admit his nephew’s cab, he noted the lodge, porter, courtyard, stables, arrangement, flowers, cleanliness of banisters, walls, and carpets, and counted the footmen in livery who appeared at the landing. His eyes, which yesterday had sounded the dignity of misery beneath muddy clothing, now studied the furniture and splendor to pierce the misery of grandeur.

“M. Popinot—M. Bianchon.”

Their names were pronounced at the door of the boudoir, a pretty room recently refurnished and looking on the garden. Madame d’Espard was seated in an old rococo armchair she had set the fashion for. Rastignac was at her left on a low chair, settled like an Italian lady’s “cousin.” A third person stood by the chimney-piece. As the shrewd doctor suspected, the Marquise was of a parched, wiry constitution. But for her regimen her complexion might have been ruddy; she added to her acquired pallor the strong colors of stuffs that suited her. Her boudoir, copied from a fashionable London lady’s, was in tan-colored velvet, moderated by other ornaments. Her hair was banded into curls, emphasizing a rather long oval face; mirrors cut to lengthen or flatten the face proved the rule applied to physiognomy.

Popinot entered, craning his neck like a startled animal, left hand in pocket, right hand holding a hat with a greasy lining. The Marquise gave Rastignac a look with a touch of mockery. Popinot’s foolish appearance, grotesque figure, and scared looks suited him so well that Rastignac, catching Bianchon’s dejected expression through his uncle, could not help laughing and turned away. The Marquise bowed a greeting and made a great effort to rise, apologizing for her incivility by affected weakness.

The man standing by the fireplace bowed slightly and pushed forward two chairs for the doctor and judge; after they sat he leaned against the wall, arms crossed. A word as to this man: there is a painter—Decamps—who can compel your interest in whatever he sets before you, whether stone or man. His pencil can invest an empty room or a broom with meaning. I should need that painter’s genius to depict the upright, tall, lean man dressed in black who stood there silent. His face was like a knife-blade, cold and harsh, with a color like muddy Seine water strewn with charcoal. He looked at the floor, listening and passing judgment. His attitude was terrifying, like Decamps’ broom revealed as if it could disclose a crime. Now and then the Marquise sought tacit advice; however eager her questions, he remained as grave and rigid as the statue of the Commendatore.

Popinot, sitting on the edge of his chair in front of the fire with his hat between his knees, stared at the gilt chandeliers, clock, and the curiosities on the mantel, the velvet curtains and trimmings—costly elegant nothings a woman of fashion collects. The Marquise addressed him in a piping tone.

“Monsieur, I owe you a million thanks—”

“A million thanks,” he thought; “that is too many; it does not mean one.”

“For the trouble you condescend—”

“Condescend!” thought he; “she is laughing at me.”

“To take in coming to see an unhappy client who is too ill to go out—”

Popinot cut her short with an inquisitorial look, examining the sanitary condition of the unhappy client.

“As sound as a bell,” he thought.

“Madame,” he said, assuming respect, “you owe me nothing. Although my visit is not strictly according to Court practice, we ought to spare no pains to discover the truth in cases of this kind. Our judgment is guided less by the letter of the law than by conscience. Whether I seek the truth here or in my consulting-room, so long as I find it, all will be well.”

While Popinot spoke, Rastignac shook hands with Bianchon; the Marquise welcomed the doctor with a little significant bow.

“Who is that?” Bianchon whispered, indicating the dark man.

“The Chevalier d’Espard, the Marquis’ brother.”

“Your nephew told me,” the Marquise said to Popinot, “how much you are occupied, and I know too that you are so good as to wish to conceal your kind actions, to relieve those whom you oblige from gratitude. The work in Court is fatiguing; why have they not twice as many judges?”

“Ah, madame, that would not be difficult; we should be none the worse if they had. But when that happens, fowls will cut their teeth!” Popinot quipped.

The Chevalier measured him with one eye as if to say, “We shall easily manage him.”

The Marquise looked at Rastignac, who bent over her. “That is the sort of man,” murmured the dandy in her ear, “who is trusted to pass judgments on the life and interests of private individuals.”

Like most men grown old in a business, Popinot followed his habits of mind. His conversation was all of “the shop.” He liked to question people, forcing them to unexpected conclusions, making them reveal more than they intended. As soon as Popinot had surveyed his ground, he resolved to use the subtleties of the Courts to detect the truth.

Bianchon sat cold and stern, like a man who has made up his mind to endure torture without revealing his sufferings; in his heart he wished his uncle could trample on this woman as one tramples a viper—a comparison suggested by the Marquise’s long dress, the curve of her attitude, her long neck, small head, and undulating movements.

“Well, monsieur,” said Madame d’Espard, “however great my dislike to seem selfish, I have suffered too long not to wish you may settle matters at once. Shall I soon get a favorable decision?”

“Madame, I will do my best,” said Popinot with frank good-nature. “Are you ignorant of the reason which made the separation necessary between you and the Marquis d’Espard?”

“Yes, monsieur,” she replied, evidently prepared. “At the beginning of 1816 M. d’Espard, whose temper changed within three months, proposed that we go to one of his estates near Briançon, without regard for my health, which that climate would have destroyed, or for my habits; I refused. My refusal gave rise to such reproaches that from that hour I suspected his mind was unsound. The following day he left me, leaving his house and the free use of my income, and he went to live in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève, taking my two children—”

“One moment,” said the lawyer, interrupting. “What was that income?”

“Twenty-six thousand francs a year,” she said parenthetically. “I at once consulted old M. Bordin; but there are so many difficulties in depriving a father of his children’s care that I had to resign myself to remaining alone at twenty-two—an age at which many young women do foolish things. You have read my petition, no doubt, monsieur; you know the facts on which I rely to procure a Commission in Lunacy concerning M. d’Espard?”

“Have you ever applied to him, madame, to obtain the care of your children?”

“Yes, monsieur; but in vain. It is hard on a mother to be deprived of her children’s affection when they could give her such happiness.”

“The elder must be sixteen,” said Popinot.

“Fifteen,” the Marquise eagerly corrected.

Bianchon and Rastignac exchanged looks. The Marquise bit her lips.

“What can the age of my children matter to you?”

“Well, madame,” said the judge without seeming to attach importance to his words, “a lad of fifteen and his brother, of thirteen, I suppose, have legs and wits; they might come to see you on the sly. If they do not, it is because they obey their father, and to obey him in that matter they must love him dearly.”

“I do not understand,” said the Marquise.

“You do not know, perhaps,” Popinot replied, “that in your petition your attorney represents your children as very unhappy with their father?”

Madame d’Espard answered with charming innocence, “I do not know what my attorney may have put into my mouth.”

“Forgive my inferences,” said Popinot, “but Justice weighs everything. As you tell it, M. d’Espard deserted you on frivolous pretext. Instead of going to Briançon he remained in Paris. This point is not clear. Did he know this Madame Jeanrenaud before his marriage?”

“No, monsieur,” she replied with some asperity, visible only to Rastignac and the Chevalier.

She was offended at being cross-examined when she had intended to beguile his judgment; but Popinot, appearing stupid from absence of mind, made her attribute his inquiries to the Questioning Spirit of Voltaire’s bailiff.

“My parents married me at sixteen to M. d’Espard, whose name, fortune, and manner were what my family sought. M. d’Espard was then twenty-six; he was a gentleman in the English sense; his manners pleased me, he seemed ambitious, and I like ambitious people,” she added, looking at Rastignac. “If M. d’Espard had never met Madame Jeanrenaud, his learning and acquirements would have raised him—his friends believed—to high office. King Charles X esteemed him; a peer’s seat or Court appointment would have been his. That woman turned his head and ruined my family’s prospects.”

“What were M. d’Espard’s religious opinions at that time?”

“He was, and is still, very pious.”

“You do not suppose Madame Jeanrenaud influenced him by mysticism?”

“No, monsieur.”

“You have a very fine house, madame,” said Popinot suddenly, taking his hands out of his pockets and rising to pick up his coat-tails to warm himself. “This boudoir is very nice; those chairs are magnificent; the whole apartment is sumptuous. You must indeed be most unhappy when, seeing yourself here, you know your children are ill lodged, ill clothed, and ill fed. I can imagine nothing more terrible for a mother.”

“Yes, indeed. I would be glad to give the poor little fellows some amusement, while their father keeps them at work from morning till night on that wretched history of China.”

“You give handsome balls; they would enjoy them but might acquire a taste for dissipation. However, their father might send them to you once or twice in the winter.”

“He brings them here on my birthday and on New Year’s Day. On those days M. d’Espard dines here with them.”

“It is singular behaviour,” said the judge, with conviction. “Have you ever seen this Dame Jeanrenaud?”

“My brother-in-law one day, out of interest in his brother—”

“Ah! monsieur is M. d’Espard’s brother?” interrupted the lawyer.

The Chevalier bowed but did not speak.

“M. d’Espard, who has watched this affair, took me to the Oratoire where this woman goes to sermon, for she is a Protestant. I saw her; she is not at all attractive; she looks like a butcher’s wife, extremely fat, horribly marked with smallpox; she has feet and hands like a man’s, she squints; in short, she is monstrous!”

“It is inconceivable,” said the judge, looking the most imbecile judge in the kingdom. “And this creature lives near here, Rue Verte, in a fine house? There are no plain folk left, it would seem?”

“In a mansion on which her son has spent absurd sums.”

“Madame,” said Popinot, “I live in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau; I know nothing of such expenses. What do you call absurd sums?”

“Well,” said the Marquise, “a stable with five horses and three carriages, a phaeton, a brougham, and a cabriolet.”

“That costs a large sum, then?” asked Popinot in surprise.

“Enormous sums!” said Rastignac, intervening. “Such an establishment would cost, for the stables, keeping the carriages, and the liveries for the men, between fifteen and sixteen thousand francs a year.”

“Should you think so, madame?” asked the judge, astonished.

“Yes, at least,” replied the Marquise.

“And the furniture, too, must have cost a lot?” asked Popinot.

“More than a hundred thousand francs,” replied Madame d’Espard, unable to hide a smile at the lawyer’s vulgarity.

“Judges are apt to be incredulous; it is what they are paid for, and I am incredulous. The Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother must have fleeced M. d’Espard most preposterously, if what you say is correct. There is a stable establishment which, by your account, costs sixteen thousand francs. Housekeeping, servants’ wages, and the gross expenses must run to twice as much; that makes fifty to sixty thousand francs a year. Do you suppose these people, formerly so poor, can have such a fortune? A million yields scarcely forty thousand a year.”

“Monsieur, the mother and son invested the money given them by M. d’Espard in the funds when rates were 60 to 80. I should think their income must exceed sixty thousand francs. And the son has fine appointments.”

“If they spend sixty thousand francs a year,” said the judge, “how much do you spend?”

“Well,” said Madame d’Espard, “about the same.” The Chevalier started, the Marquise colored; Bianchon looked at Rastignac; but Popinot preserved an expression of simple good-nature that deceived her. The chevalier took no part; he saw that all was lost.

“These people might be indicted before the superior Court,” said Popinot.

“That was my opinion,” exclaimed the Marquise, enchanted. “If threatened with the police, they would have come to terms.”

“Madame,” said Popinot, “when M. d’Espard left you, did he not give you a power of attorney enabling you to manage your own affairs?”

“I do not understand the object of all these questions,” the Marquise said petulantly. “It seems to me that if you would consider my situation caused by my husband’s insanity, you ought to trouble yourself about him, not about me.”

“We are coming to that, madame,” said the judge. “Before placing in your hands, or in any others, control of M. d’Espard’s property—supposing he were pronounced incapable—the Court must inquire how you have managed your own. If M. d’Espard gave you power, he showed confidence, and the Court would recognize it. Had you any power from him? You might have bought or sold property or invested money?”

“No, monsieur, the Blamont-Chauvrys are not in the habit of trading,” she said, nettled and forgetting the case. “My property is intact, and M. d’Espard gave me no power to act.”

The Chevalier covered his eyes not to betray vexation at his sister-in-law’s short-sightedness; she was ruining herself by her answers. Popinot had gone straight to the mark despite apparent doublings.

“Madame,” said the lawyer, indicating the Chevalier, “this gentleman is your near connection? May we speak openly before these other gentlemen?”

“Speak on,” said the Marquise, surprised.

“Well, madame, granting you spend only sixty thousand francs a year, to any one who sees your stables, house, servants, and style of housekeeping—which strikes me as more luxurious than the Jeanrenauds’—that sum would seem well laid out.”

The Marquise bowed agreement.

“But,” continued the judge, “if you have only twenty-six thousand francs a year, you may have a hundred thousand francs of debt. The Court would thus have a right to imagine that motives prompting you to ask your husband be deprived of control of his property are complicated by self-interest and the need to pay debts—if—you—have—any. The requests addressed to me have interested me in your position; consider fully and confess. If my suppositions are true, there is yet time to avoid the blame the Court would express in the verdict if you could not show your attitude absolutely honorable and clear.

“It is our duty to examine the motives of the applicant as well as the witness, to ascertain whether the petitioner may not have been prompted by passion or by desire for money—which is too common—”

The Marquise was on Saint Laurence’s gridiron.

“And I must have explanations. Madame, I have no wish to call you to account; I only want to know how you have managed to live at the rate of sixty thousand francs a year for some years. There are women who achieve this in housekeeping, but you are not one of those. Tell me: you may have legitimate resources, a royal pension, or claims on indemnities, but even then you must have had your husband’s authority to receive them.”

The Marquise did not speak.

“You must remember,” Popinot went on, “that M. d’Espard may wish to enter a protest, and his counsel will investigate whether you have creditors. This boudoir is newly furnished; your rooms are not what they were in 1816. If, as you told me, furniture is costly for the Jeanrenauds, it must be yet more so for you, a great lady. Though I am a judge, I am but a man and may be wrong—tell me so. Remember the duties the law imposes when the case is the suspension from all his functions of the father of a family in the prime of life. You will pardon me, Madame la Marquise, for laying these difficulties before you; it will be easy to explain.

“When a man is pronounced incapable, a trustee has to be appointed. Who will be trustee?”

“His brother,” said the Marquise.

The Chevalier bowed. A short silence, uncomfortable for the five present. The judge, in sport, had laid open the woman’s sore place. Popinot’s countenance of clumsy good-nature, once laughed at, gained importance in their eyes. As they looked they discerned the expressions of that eloquent mouth. The ridiculous mortal was a judge of acumen. His notice of the boudoir had led from gilt decorations to reading this woman’s soul.

“If the Marquis d’Espard is mad about China, I see you are not less fond of its products,” said Popinot, pointing to porcelain on the mantel. “But perhaps you had these Oriental pieces from M. le Marquis.”

This gentle irony made Bianchon smile and petrified Rastignac, while the Marquise bit her thin lips.

“Rather than be the protector of a woman placed between losing her fortune and her children and being regarded as her husband’s enemy,” she said, “you accuse me, monsieur! You suspect my motives! Your conduct is strange!”

“Madame,” said the judge eagerly, “the caution of the Court might have given you, in another judge, a less indulgent critic than I am. And do you suppose M. d’Espard’s lawyer will show you great consideration? He will be suspicious of motives that may be pure. Your life will be at his mercy; he will inquire without the respectful deference I have for you.”

“I am much obliged to you, monsieur,” said the Marquise satirically. “Admitting I owe thirty or fifty thousand francs, it would be a mere trifle to the d’Espards and the Blamont-Chauvrys. But if my husband is not in his mental faculties, would that prevent his being pronounced incapable?”

“No, madame,” said Popinot.

“Although you have questioned me with a sort of cunning I should not have suspected in a judge, and where straightforwardness would have answered, I will tell you without subterfuge that my position and the efforts I make to keep up my connection are not to my taste. I began with solitude; but my children’s interest appealed to me; I felt I must fill their father’s place. By receiving friends, keeping connections, and contracting debts, I have secured their future; I have prepared for them a brilliant career where they will find help and favor; and to have what has been acquired, many a man of business would gladly pay all it has cost me.”

“I appreciate your devoted conduct, madame,” replied Popinot. “It does you honor, and I blame you for nothing. A judge belongs to all: he must know and weigh every fact.”

Madame d’Espard realized Popinot would not be influenced. She had counted on an ambitious lawyer and found a man of conscience. She thought of finding other means to secure success.

The servants brought tea.

“Have you any further explanations?” Popinot asked, seeing preparations.

“Monsieur,” she replied haughtily, “do your business your own way; question M. d’Espard, and you will pity me, I am sure.” She raised her head, looking Popinot full in the face with pride mingled with impertinence; the worthy man bowed out respectfully.

“A nice man is your uncle,” Rastignac said to Bianchon. “Is he really so dense? Does he not know what the Marquise is, what her influence means, her unavowed power? The Keeper of the Seals will be with her to-morrow—”

“My dear fellow, how can I help it?” Bianchon said. “Did not I warn you? He is not a man you can get over.”

“No,” said Rastignac. “He is a man you must run over.”

The doctor bowed to the Marquise and her mute Chevalier to catch up Popinot, who, not being one to endure embarrassment, was pacing through the rooms.

“That woman owes a hundred thousand crowns,” said the judge as he stepped into his nephew’s cab.

“And what do you think of the case?”

“I,” said the judge, “never have an opinion till I have gone into everything. To-morrow early I will send to Madame Jeanrenaud to call on me in my private office at four o’clock to make her explain the facts that concern her, for she is compromised.”

“I should very much like to know what the end will be.”

“Why, bless me, do not you see the Marquise is the tool of that tall lean man who never uttered a word? There is a strain of Cain in him, but of the Cain who goes to the Law Courts for his bludgeon; unluckily for him, we keep more than one Damocles’ sword.”

“Oh, Rastignac! what brought you into that boat, I wonder?” exclaimed Bianchon.

“Ah, we are used to these family conspiracies,” said Popinot. “Not a year passes without many ‘insufficient evidence’ verdicts against such applications. In our society such an attempt brings no dishonor, while we send a poor devil to the galleys who breaks a pane of glass dividing him from a bowl of gold. Our Code is not faultless.”

Next day at four, a very stout dame, like a cask in a gown and belt, mounted Judge Popinot’s stairs, perspiring and panting. She had difficulty getting out of a green landau which oddly suited her.

“It is I, my dear sir,” she said at the judge’s door. “Madame Jeanrenaud, whom you summoned exactly as if I were a thief.”

Her words were plain, broken by wheeze and cough.

“When I go through a damp place, I can’t tell you what I suffer, sir. I shall never make old bones, saving your presence. However, here I am.”

The judge was amazed at the appearance of this supposed Marechale d’Ancre. Madame Jeanrenaud’s face was pitted with smallpox, very red, with a pug nose and low forehead, and round as a ball; everything about her was round. She had the bright eyes of a country woman, an honest gaze, a cheerful tone, and chestnut hair held by a cap under a green bonnet with a shabby bunch of auriculas. Her stupendous bust threatened grotesque explosion with every cough. Her enormous legs were built on piles. The widow wore a green gown trimmed with chinchilla, which looked like a splash of oil on a bride’s veil. Everything harmonized with her last words: “Here I am.”

“Madame,” said Popinot, “you are suspected of using seductive arts to induce M. d’Espard to give you considerable sums.”

“Of what! of what!” she cried. “Seductive arts? Look at me! Tell me if I am likely to seduce anyone. I cannot tie my own shoes nor stoop. For twenty years, the Lord be praised, I have not dared to wear stays under pain of sudden death. I was thin as an asparagus at seventeen and pretty too—I may say so. So I married Jeanrenaud, a good fellow and headman on the salt-barges. I had my boy, who is my pride and a fine young man who did Napoleon credit in the Imperial Guard. But times changed; my old man drowned; I had smallpox and came out the size you see me, hideous forever and miserable. These are my seductive arts.”

“But what reasons induced M. d’Espard to give you sums—”

“Hugious sums, monsieur, say the word; I do not mind. But as to his reasons, I am not at liberty to explain them.”

“You are wrong. At this moment his family, naturally alarmed, are about to bring an action—”

“Heavens above us!” the good woman exclaimed, starting up. “Is it possible he should be worried on my account? That king of men, a man without his match! Rather than he should have the smallest trouble, or hair less on his head I could almost say, we would return every sou, monsieur. Write that down. Heaven above us! I will go at once and tell Jeanrenaud what is going on!” And the little old woman rolled downstairs and disappeared.

“That one tells no lies,” said Popinot to himself. “Well, tomorrow I shall know the whole story, for I shall go to see the Marquis d’Espard.”
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
People who have outlived the age when a man wastes his vitality at random know how great an influence may be exercised on important events by apparently trivial incidents, and will not be surprised at the weight here given to the following minor fact. Next day Popinot had an attack of coryza, a complaint not dangerous, known by the inadequate name of a cold in the head.

The judge, who could not suppose the delay serious, feeling a little feverish, kept his room and did not go to see the Marquis d’Espard. This day lost was to this affair what the cup of soup taken by Marie de Médici on the Day of Dupes had been, which, by delaying her meeting with Louis XIII., enabled Richelieu to arrive at Saint-Germain before her and recapture his royal slave.

Before accompanying the lawyer and his registering clerk to the Marquis d’Espard’s house, it may be well to glance at the home and private affairs of this father of sons whom his wife’s petition represented as mad.

Here and there in the old parts of Paris a few buildings still show an intention of decorating the city and a love of property that leads the owner to give a durable character to the structure. The house in which M. d’Espard then lived, in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève, was one of these old mansions, built in stone and not devoid of a certain richness of style; but time had blackened the stone, and revolutions had damaged it both outside and in. The dignitaries who formerly dwelt near the University having disappeared with the great ecclesiastical foundations, this house had become the home of industry and of inhabitants it was never meant to shelter. During the last century a printing establishment had worn down the polished floors, soiled the carved wood, blackened the walls, and altered the principal internal arrangements. Formerly the residence of a Cardinal, this fine house was now divided among plebeian tenants. The character of the architecture showed it had been built under Henry III., Henry IV., and Louis XIII., when the hôtels Mignon and Serpente were erected nearby, with the palace of the Princess Palatine and the Sorbonne. An old man remembered it called, in the last century, the hôtel Duperron, so it seemed probable that the illustrious Cardinal of that name had built, or perhaps merely lived in it.

There still exists, indeed, in the corner of the courtyard, a perron or flight of several outer steps by which the house is entered; and the way into the garden on the garden front is down a similar flight. In spite of dilapidations, the luxury lavished by the architect on the balustrade and entrance porch crowning these two perrons suggests the simple-minded purpose of commemorating the owner’s name, a sort of sculptured pun our ancestors often allowed themselves. Finally, archaeologists can still discern in the medallions on the principal front traces of the cords of the Roman hat.

M. le Marquis d’Espard lived on the ground floor, no doubt to enjoy the garden, which might be called spacious for that neighborhood, and which lay open for his children’s health. The situation of the house, in a street on a steep hill as its name indicates, secured these ground-floor rooms against damp. M. d’Espard had taken them, no doubt, for a moderate price, rents being low when he settled there to be among the schools and superintend his boys’ education. Moreover, the state of the place, with everything to repair, had no doubt induced the owner to be accommodating. Thus M. d’Espard could go to some expense to settle himself suitably without being accused of extravagance. The loftiness of the rooms, the paneling of which nothing survived but the frames, the decoration of the ceilings, all displayed the dignity which the prelacy stamped on whatever it attempted or created, and which artists still discern in the smallest relic that remains, be it a book, a dress, the panel of a bookcase, or an armchair.

The Marquis had the rooms painted in the rich brown tones loved by the Dutch and the citizens of Old Paris, hues that lend good effects to the painter of genre. The panels were hung with plain paper in harmony with the paint. The window curtains were of inexpensive materials, chosen to produce a generally happy result; the furniture was not too crowded and judiciously placed. Anyone entering this home could not resist a sense of sweet peacefulness produced by the perfect calm, the stillness, the unpretentious unity of color, the keeping of the picture, in a painter’s phrase. A certain nobleness in the details, the exquisite cleanliness of the furniture, and a perfect concord of men and things all brought the word “suavity” to the lips.

Few persons were admitted to the rooms used by the Marquis and his two sons, whose life might perhaps seem mysterious to their neighbors. In a wing towards the street, on the third floor, there were three large rooms left in the dilapidated, grotesque bareness to which they had been reduced by the printing works. These three rooms, devoted to the evolution of the Picturesque History of China, served as a writing-room, a depository, and a private room where M. d’Espard sat part of the day; for after breakfast till four in the afternoon the Marquis remained on the third floor to work at the publication he had undertaken. Visitors wanting to see him commonly found him there, and often the two boys on their return from school resorted thither. Thus the ground-floor rooms were a sort of sanctuary where father and sons spent their time from the hour of dinner till the next day, and his domestic life was carefully closed against the public eye.

His only servants were a cook—an old woman long attached to his family—and a man-servant forty years old who had been with him when he married Mademoiselle de Blamont. His children’s nurse had also remained with them, and the minute care to which the apartment bore witness revealed the sense of order and the maternal affections expended by this woman in her master’s interest, in the management of his house, and the charge of his children. These three good souls, grave and uncommunicative, seemed to have entered into the idea that ruled the Marquis’ domestic life. The contrast between their habits and those of most servants was a peculiarity that cast an air of mystery over the house and fomented the calumny to which M. d’Espard himself lent occasion. Very laudable motives had made him determine never to be on visiting terms with any of the other tenants. In undertaking to educate his boys he wished to keep them from all contact with strangers. Perhaps, too, he wished to avoid the intrusion of neighbors.

In a man of his rank, at a time when the Quartier Latin was distracted by Liberalism, such conduct was sure to rouse petty passions, feelings whose folly is only measured by their meanness, the outcome of porters’ gossip and malevolent tattle from door to door, all unknown to M. d’Espard and his retainers. His man-servant was stigmatized as a Jesuit, his cook as a sly fox; the nurse was in collusion with Madame Jeanrenaud to rob the madman. The madman was the Marquis. By degrees the other tenants came to regard as proofs of madness a number of things they had noticed in M. d’Espard, passing them through the sieve of their judgment without discerning any reasonable motive.

Having no belief in the success of the History of China, they managed to convince the landlord that M. d’Espard had no money just at a time when, with the forgetfulness that often befalls busy men, he had allowed the tax-collector to send him a summons for non-payment of arrears. The landlord forthwith claimed his quarter’s rent from January 1st by sending in a receipt, which the porter’s wife amused herself by detaining. On the 15th a summons to pay was served on M. d’Espard; the portress had delivered it at her leisure, and he supposed it to be some misunderstanding, not conceiving of any incivility from a man in whose house he had lived for twelve years. The Marquis was actually seized by a bailiff at the time his man-servant had gone to carry the money for the rent to the landlord.

This arrest, assiduously reported to those with whom he was in treaty for his undertaking, alarmed some who were already doubtful of M. d’Espard’s solvency because of the enormous sums said to be received from him by Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother. And indeed, these suspicions had some excuse in the Marquis’ extreme economy in housekeeping. He conducted it as a ruined man might. His servants always paid in ready money for the most trifling necessaries, acting as if they chose not to take credit; had they asked for credit, they might have been refused, such was the extent of the calumnious gossip. There are tradesmen who like customers who pay badly when they see them often, while they hate others; and very good ones hold themselves on too high a level to allow familiarity. Men are made so; in almost every class they will allow to a gossip, or a vulgar soul that flatters them, facilities and favors they refuse to the superiority they resent. The shopkeeper who rails at the Court has his courtiers.

In short, the manners of the Marquis and his children were certain to arouse ill-feeling in their neighbors, and to work them up by degrees to malevolence when men do not hesitate at meanness if it may damage the adversary they have themselves created.

M. d’Espard was a gentleman, as his wife was a lady, by birth and breeding; noble types already rare in France that the observer can easily count. These two characters are based on primitive ideas, on beliefs that may be called innate, on habits formed in infancy and which have ceased to exist. To believe in pure blood, in a privileged race, to stand in thought above other men—must we not from birth have measured the distance that divides patricians from the mob? To command, must we not have never met our equal? And finally, must not education inculcate the ideas with which Nature inspires those great men on whose brow she has placed a crown before their mother has ever set a kiss there? These ideas and this education are no longer possible in France, where for forty years chance has arrogated the right of making noblemen by dipping them in the blood of battles, gilding them with glory, crowning them with the halo of genius; where the abolition of entail and of eldest sonship, by frittering away estates, compels the nobleman to attend to his own business instead of affairs of state, and where personal greatness can only be acquired by long patient toil: quite a new era.

Regarded as a relic of that great institution known as feudalism, M. d’Espard deserved respectful admiration. If he believed himself by blood the superior of other men, he also believed in all the obligations of nobility; he had the virtues and strength it demands. He had brought up his children in his principles, teaching them from the cradle the religion of their caste. A deep sense of their own dignity, pride of name, the conviction that they were by birth great, gave rise to in them a kingly pride, the courage of knights, and the protecting kindness of a baronial lord; their manners, harmonizing with their notions, would have become princes, and offended all the world of the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève—a world, above all others, of equality, where everyone believed M. d’Espard was ruined, and where all, from the lowest to the highest, refused the privileges of nobility to a nobleman without money, because they were ready to allow an enriched bourgeois to usurp them. Thus the lack of communion between this family and others was as much moral as physical.

In father and children alike, their personality harmonized with the spirit within. M. d’Espard, then about fifty, might have sat as a model representing the aristocracy of birth in the nineteenth century. He was slight and fair; the outline and general expression of his face showed native distinction suggesting lofty sentiments, but bore the impress of a deliberate coldness that commanded respect perhaps a little too decidedly. His aquiline nose bent slightly at the tip from left to right, a crookedness not devoid of grace; his blue eyes and high forehead, prominent enough at the brows to form a thick ridge that checked the light and shaded his eyes, indicated rectitude, perseverance, and perfect loyalty, while giving a singular look to his countenance. This penthouse forehead might hint at a touch of madness, and his thick-knitted eyebrows added to the apparent eccentricity. He had the white well-kept hands of a gentleman; his foot was high and narrow. His hesitating speech—not merely a stammer but also in the expression of his ideas—produced on the hearer the impression of a man who, in familiar phrase, comes and goes, feels his way, tries everything, breaks off his gestures, and finishes nothing. This defect was superficial, in contrast with the decisiveness of a firmly-set mouth and the strongly marked character of his physiognomy. His rather jerky gait matched his mode of speech. These peculiarities helped affirm his supposed insanity. In spite of elegant appearance, he was systematically parsimonious in personal expenses, wearing the same black frock-coat for three or four years, brushed with extreme care by his old man-servant.

As to the children, both were handsome, endowed with a grace not excluding an expression of aristocratic disdain. They had bright coloring, clear eyes, transparent flesh revealing purity, regularity of life, and a due proportion of work and play. Both had black hair, blue eyes, and a twist in their nose like their father; their mother perhaps transmitted the dignity of speech, look, and mien hereditary in the Blamont-Chauvrys. Their voices, as clear as crystal, had an emotional softness that proved seductive; they had, in short, the voice a woman would willingly listen to after feeling the flame of their looks. But above all, they had the modesty of pride, a chaste reserve, a touch-me-not which at maturity might seem intentional coyness, so much did their demeanor inspire a wish to know them. The elder, Comte Clément de Négrepelisse, was close upon his sixteenth year. For two years he had ceased to wear the pretty English round jacket which his brother, Vicomte Camille d’Espard, still wore. The Count, who for six months had gone no more to the Collège Henri IV, was dressed in the style of a young man enjoying the first pleasures of fashion. His father had not wished to condemn him to a year’s useless study of philosophy; he was trying to give his knowledge consistency by the study of transcendental mathematics. At the same time, the Marquis was having him taught Eastern languages, the international law of Europe, heraldry, and history from original sources, charters, early documents, and collections of edicts. Camille had lately begun to study rhetoric.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The day when Popinot arranged to question M. d’Espard was a Thursday, a holiday. At about nine in the morning, before their father awoke, the brothers were playing in the garden. Clément found it hard to refuse his brother, who was eager to go to the shooting-gallery for the first time and begged him to back his request to the Marquis. The Viscount always took advantage of his weakness and loved wrestling with his brother. The two quarrelled and fought in play like schoolboys. As they ran through the garden, making so much noise that they woke their father, he came to the window without their noticing him amid the fray. The Marquis amused himself watching his two children twisted together, their faces flushed by exertion; they fell, sprang up, and seized each other like athletes, giving their father a moment of happiness that more than repaid his anxieties. Two other persons, one on the second and one on the first floor, also looked into the garden, saying the old madman amused himself by making his children fight. Immediately a number of heads appeared at the windows; the Marquis, noticing them, called a word to his sons, who climbed up to the window and jumped into his room, and Clément obtained the permission Camille had asked for.

All through the house everyone spoke of the Marquis’ new form of insanity. When Popinot arrived about twelve, accompanied by his clerk, the portress, asked for M. d’Espard, conducted him to the third floor, telling him “as how M. d’Espard, no later than this morning, had set his two children to fight, and laughed like the monster he was on seeing the younger bite the elder till he bled, and as how no doubt he longed to see them kill each other. Don’t ask me the reason why,” she added; “he doesn’t show himself!”

As she spoke, she brought the judge to the landing on the third floor, face to face with a door plastered with notices of the Picturesque History of China. The muddy floor, dirty banisters, the door where the printers had left marks, the dilapidated window, the ceiling on which apprentices had drawn monstrosities with smoky tallow dips, piles of paper and litter in the corners—intentionally or from neglect—every detail agreed with the Marquise’s account, and the judge, despite his impartiality, could not help believing them.

“There you are, gentlemen,” said the porter’s wife; “there is the manufactory, where the Chinese swallow up enough to feed the whole neighborhood.”

The clerk smiled at the judge, and Popinot found it hard to keep his countenance. They entered the outer room, where sat an old man who likely performed the duties of clerk, shopman, and cashier—this was the Maitre Jacques of China. Along the walls ran long shelves piled with published numbers. A wooden partition with a grating and green curtains cut off the end of the room, forming a private office. A till with a slit marked the cash-desk.

“M. d’Espard?” said Popinot to the man in a gray blouse.

The shopman opened the next room, where the lawyer and his companion saw a venerable white-headed man, simply dressed, wearing the Cross of Saint-Louis, seated at a desk. He stopped comparing colored prints to look up. This room was an unpretentious office, full of books and proof-sheets, with a black wood table where someone usually worked.

“Monsieur le Marquis?” said Popinot.

“No, monsieur,” said the old man, rising; “what do you want with him?” he added, coming forward, showing by his bearing the manners of a gentleman.

“We wish to speak with him on business exclusively personal to himself,” replied Popinot.

“D’Espard, here are some gentlemen who want to see you,” said the old man, going into the furthest room, where the Marquis sat by the fire reading a newspaper.

This innermost room had a shabby carpet, gray holland curtains at the windows; the furniture comprised a few mahogany chairs, two armchairs, a desk with a revolving front, an ordinary office table, and on the chimney-shelf a dingy clock and two old candlesticks. The old man led the way for Popinot and his registrar, pulled forward two chairs as if he were master; M. d’Espard left it to him. After preliminary civilities, during which the judge watched the supposed lunatic, the Marquis naturally asked the object of the visit. Popinot glanced at the old gentleman and the Marquis.

“I believe, Monsieur le Marquis,” said he, “that the character of my functions and the inquiry that has brought me here make it desirable that we should be alone, though it is understood by law that in such cases the inquiries have a sort of family publicity. I am judge on the Inferior Court of Appeal for the Department of the Seine, charged by the President with the duty of examining you as to certain facts set forth in a petition for a Commission in Lunacy by the Marquise d’Espard.”

The old man withdrew. When the lawyer and the Marquis were alone, the clerk shut the door and sat at the office table to take notes. Popinot watched M. d’Espard’s reaction to the painful statement, for the Marquis, usually pale, suddenly turned scarlet with anger; he trembled, sat down, put his paper on the chimney-piece, and looked down. In a moment he recovered his dignity, looked steadily at the judge to read his character.

“How is it, monsieur,” he asked, “that I have had no notice of such a petition?”

“Monsieur le Marquis, persons on whom such a commission is held not being supposed to have the use of their reason, any notice of the petition is unnecessary. The duty of the Court chiefly consists in verifying the petitioner’s allegations.”

“Nothing can be fairer,” replied the Marquis. “Well, then, monsieur, be so good as to tell me what I ought to do—”

“You have only to answer my questions, omitting nothing. However delicate the reasons may be which may have led you to act in such a manner as to give Madame d’Espard a pretext for her petition, speak without fear. It is unnecessary to assure you that lawyers know their duties, and that in such cases the profoundest secrecy—”

“Monsieur,” said the Marquis, his face expressing sincere pain, “if my explanations should lead to any blame being attached to Madame d’Espard’s conduct, what will be the result?”

“The Court may add its censure to its reasons for its decision.”

“Is such censure optional? If I were to stipulate with you, before replying, that nothing should be said that could annoy Madame d’Espard should your report favor me, would the Court consider my request?”

The judge looked at the Marquis, and the two men exchanged sentiments of equal magnanimity.

“Noel,” said Popinot to his registrar, “go into the other room. If you can be of use, I will call you in. If, as I am inclined to think,” he went on, speaking to the Marquis when the clerk had gone out, “I find some misunderstanding in this case, I can promise you, monsieur, that on your application the Court will act with due courtesy.

“There is a leading fact put forward by Madame d’Espard, the most serious, of which I must beg an explanation,” said the judge after a pause. “It refers to the dissipation of your fortune to the advantage of a certain Madame Jeanrenaud, the widow of a bargemaster—or rather, to that of her son, Colonel Jeanrenaud, for whom you are said to have procured an appointment, to have exhausted your influence with the King, and at last to have extended such protection as secures him a good marriage. The petition suggests that such a friendship is more devoted than any feelings, even those which morality must disapprove—”

A sudden flush crimsoned the Marquis’ face and forehead, tears even started to his eyes, then pride crushed the emotions, which in a man are counted a weakness.

“To tell you the truth, monsieur,” said the Marquis, in a broken voice, “you place me in a strange dilemma. The motives of my conduct were to have died with me. To reveal them I must disclose secret wounds, place the honor of my family in your keeping, and speak of myself—a delicate matter, as you will understand. I hope, monsieur, that it will all remain between us. You will, no doubt, find in legal formulas one which will allow judgment without betrayal of my confidences.”

“So far as that goes, it is perfectly possible, Monsieur le Marquis.”

“Some time after my marriage,” said M. d’Espard, “my wife having run into considerable expenses, I had to borrow. You know what was the position of noble families during the Revolution; I could not keep a steward or man of business. Nowadays gentlemen manage their affairs themselves. Most of my title-deeds had been brought to Paris from Languedoc, Provence, or le Comtat by my father, who feared, not without reason, the inquisition which family title-deeds—what were then styled the ‘parchments’ of the privileged—brought down on the owners.

“Our name is Negrepelisse; d’Espard is a title acquired in the time of Henri IV. by a marriage that brought us the estates and titles of the house of d’Espard, on condition of bearing an escutcheon of pretence. At that alliance we lost Negrepelisse, a little town as famous during the religious struggles as was my ancestor. Captain de Negrepelisse was ruined by the burning of all his property, for the Protestants did not spare a friend of Montluc’s.

“The Crown was unjust to M. de Negrepelisse; he received neither a marshal’s baton nor a post as governor nor any indemnity; King Charles IX., who was fond of him, died without rewarding him; Henri IV. arranged his marriage with Mademoiselle d’Espard, and secured him the estates, but all those of the Negrepelisses had passed to his creditors.

“My great-grandfather, the Marquis d’Espard, was, like me, placed early at the head of his family by his father’s death, who, after dissipating his wife’s fortune, left his son nothing but the entailed estates of the d’Espards, burdened with a jointure. The young Marquis was straindered for money because he held a post at Court. Being in favor with Louis XIV., the King’s goodwill brought him a fortune. But here, monsieur, a blot stained our escutcheon—an unconfessed and horrible stain of blood and disgrace which I am making it my business to wipe out. I discovered the secret among the deeds relating to Negrepelisse and packets of letters.”

At this solemn moment the Marquis spoke without hesitation or repetition; persons who in ordinary life repeat are freed from that habit when passion underlies their speech.

“The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes was decreed,” he continued. “You are no doubt aware that this was an opportunity for many favorites to make fortunes. Louis XIV. bestowed on magnates the confiscated lands of Protestant families who did not take the prescribed steps for sale. Some in high favor went ‘Protestant-hunting,’ as the phrase was. I have ascertained beyond doubt that the fortune of two ducal families is derived from lands seized from hapless merchants.

“I will not explain to you, a man of law, all the maneuvers employed to entrap refugees who had fortunes to carry away. It is enough to say that the lands of Negrepelisse, comprising twenty-two churches and rights over the town, and those of Gravenges which had belonged to us, were then in the hands of a Protestant family. My grandfather recovered them by gift from Louis XIV. This gift was effected by documents hall-marked by atrocious iniquity. The owner of these estates, thinking he could return, had gone through the form of a sale and was going to Switzerland to join his family. He wished, no doubt, to take advantage of every delay granted by the law to settle his affairs.

“This man was arrested by order of the governor; the trustee confessed the truth; the poor merchant was hanged, and my ancestor had the two estates. I would gladly have ignored my ancestor’s share in the plot; but the governor was his uncle on the mother’s side, and I read the letter in which he begged him to apply to Deodatus, the name agreed upon to designate the King. In this letter is a tone of jocosity with reference to the victim, which filled me with horror. In the end, the ransom money sent by the refugee family was kept by the governor, who despatched the merchant all the same.”

The Marquis paused, as though the memory were still too heavy.

“This unfortunate family were named Jeanrenaud,” he went on. “That name is enough to account for my conduct. I could never think without keen pain of the secret disgrace that weighed on my family. That fortune enabled my grandfather to marry a demoiselle de Navarreins-Lansac, heiress to the younger branch, who were then richer than the elder. My father thus became one of the largest landowners in the kingdom. He could marry my mother, a Grandlieu of the younger branch. Though ill-gotten, this property has been singularly profitable.

“For my part, being determined to remedy the mischief, I wrote to Switzerland, and knew no peace till I traced the Protestant victim’s heirs. At last I discovered the Jeanrenauds, reduced to want, had left Fribourg and returned to France. I found a M. Jeanrenaud, lieutenant in a cavalry regiment under Napoleon, the sole heir of this family. In my eyes the Jeanrenauds’ rights were clear. To establish a prescriptive right is it not necessary that there should have been some possibility of proceeding against those in enjoyment of it? To whom could these refugees have appealed? Their Court of Justice was on high, or rather, monsieur, it was here,” and the Marquis struck his hand on his heart. “I did not choose that my children should think of me as I thought of my father and ancestors. I aimed to leave them an unblemished inheritance and escutcheon. I did not choose that nobility should be a lie in my person. And, after all, politically speaking, ought those emigrés appealing against revolutionary confiscations to keep property derived from antecedent confiscations by positive crimes?

“I found in M. Jeanrenaud and his mother the most perverse honesty; to hear them you would suppose they were robbing me. In spite of all I could say, they accepted no more than the value of the lands at the time when the King bestowed them on my family. The price was settled at eleven hundred thousand francs, which I was to pay at my convenience and without interest. To achieve this I had to forego my income for a long time. And then began the destruction of some illusions I had allowed myself about Madame d’Espard’s character. When I proposed we should leave Paris and live in the country on half her income to more rapidly complete restitution, Madame d’Espard treated me as a madman. I then understood my wife’s real character. She would have approved my grandfather’s conduct without scruple and laughed at the Huguenots. Terrified by her coldness and little affection for her children, whom she abandoned to me without regret, I determined to leave her the command of her fortune after paying our common debts. It was no business of hers, as she told me, to pay for my follies. As I then had not enough to live on and pay for my sons’ education, I resolved to educate them myself, to make them gentlemen and men of feeling. By investing my money in the funds I could pay off my obligation sooner than I had dared to hope, taking advantage of price improvements. If I had kept four thousand francs a year for my boys and myself, I could only have paid off twenty thousand crowns a year, and it would have taken almost eighteen years. As it is, I have lately repaid the whole eleven hundred thousand francs due. Thus I enjoy having made this restitution without doing my children the smallest wrong.

“These, monsieur, are the reasons for the payments made to Madame Jeanrenaud and her son.”

“So Madame d’Espard knew the motives of your retirement?” said the judge, controlling his emotion.

“Yes, monsieur.”

Popinot gave an expressive shrug; he rose and opened the door into the next room.

“Noel, you can go,” he said to his clerk.

“Monsieur,” he went on, “though what you have told me enlightens me thoroughly, I should like to hear what you have to say to other facts in the petition. For instance, you are here carrying on a business not usually undertaken by a man of rank.”

“We cannot discuss that matter here,” said the Marquis, signing to the judge to leave the room. “Nouvion,” he said to the old man, “I am going down to my rooms; the children will soon be in; dine with us.”

“Then, Monsieur le Marquis,” said Popinot on the stairs, “that is not your apartment?”

“No, monsieur; I took those rooms for the office of this undertaking. You see,” pointing to an advertisement sheet, “the History is being brought out by one of the most respectable firms in Paris, and not by me.”

The Marquis showed the lawyer into the ground-floor rooms, saying, “This is my apartment.”

Popinot was touched by the poetry pervading this dwelling. The weather was lovely, the windows open, air from the garden brought a wholesome earthy smell, sunshine brightened the rather gloomy woodwork. At the sight Popinot decided a madman would hardly invent the tender harmony he felt.

“I should like just such an apartment,” he thought. “You think of leaving this part of town?” he inquired.

“I hope so,” replied the Marquis. “But I shall remain till my younger son finishes his studies and the children’s character is formed, before introducing them to the world and their mother’s circle. Indeed, after giving them solid information, I intend to complete it by taking them to the capitals of Europe, so they may see men and things and become accustomed to the languages they have learned. And, monsieur,” he went on, giving the judge a chair, “I could not discuss the book on China with you in the presence of an old friend of my family, the Comte de Nouvion, who, having emigrated, has returned to France without fortune, and who is my partner in this concern, less for profit than his. Without telling him my motives, I explained I was as poor as he but had enough to start a speculation in which he might be usefully employed. My tutor was the Abbé Grozier, whom Charles X., on my recommendation, appointed Keeper of the Books at the Arsenal. The Abbé Grozier was deeply learned about China; he made me heir to this knowledge at an age when fanaticism for learned things is easy. At twenty-five I knew Chinese, and I confess I have never been able to check an exclusive admiration for that nation, who conquered their conquerors, whose annals extend to a period more remote than myth or Bible times, who by immutable institutions preserved their empire, whose monuments are gigantic, whose administration is perfect, among whom revolutions are impossible, who have regarded ideal beauty as a barren element in art, who have carried luxury and industry so far that we cannot outdo them in anything, while they are our equals in matters where we believe ourselves superior.

“Still, monsieur, though I often jest comparing China with European states, I am not a Chinaman, I am a French gentleman. If you doubt the financial side of this undertaking, I can prove we have two thousand five hundred subscribers; the work is literary, iconographical, statistical, and religious; its importance has been appreciated; our subscribers belong to every nation in Europe, with twelve hundred in France. Our book will cost about three hundred francs, and the Comte de Nouvion will derive from it six to seven thousand francs a year, for his comfort was the real motive. For my part, I aimed only at affording my children some pleasures. The hundred thousand francs I made will pay for fencing lessons, horses, dress, theatres, masters for accomplishments, canvases, books— all the little fancies a father enjoys providing. If I had refused these indulgences to my poor boys who are so good and work so hard, the sacrifice to honor would have been doubly painful.

“In fact, the twelve years I have spent in retirement to educate my children have left me forgotten at Court. I have given up politics; I have lost my historical fortune and distinctions I might have bequeathed; but our house will have lost nothing; my boys will be men of mark. Though I missed the senatorship, they will win it by serving the country and rendering unforgettable service. While purifying the past record of my family, I have insured it a glorious future; is not that a noble task, though secret and without glory?—And now, monsieur, have you any other explanations to ask me?”

At that instant the tramp of horses was heard in the courtyard.

“Here they are!” said the Marquis. In a moment the two lads, fashionably but plainly dressed, came into the room, booted, spurred, gloved, flourishing riding-whips. Their beaming faces brought the freshness of the outer air; they were brilliant with health. They grasped their father’s hand, gave him a look of unspoken affection, then bowed coldly to the lawyer. Popinot felt it unnecessary to question the Marquis about his relations with his sons.

“Have you enjoyed yourselves?” asked the Marquis.

“Yes, father; I knocked down six dolls in twelve shots at the first trial!” cried Camille.

“And where did you ride?”

“In the Bois; we saw my mother.”

“Did she stop?”

“We were riding so fast I daresay she did not see us,” replied the young Count.

“But then why did you not go to speak to her?”

“I fancy, father, she does not care that we should speak to her in public,” said Clément in an undertone. “We are a little too big.”

The judge’s hearing caught these words, which clouded the Marquis’ brow. Popinot took pleasure in the picture of father and boys. His eyes returned with pathos to M. d’Espard’s face; his features and manner expressed honesty in its noblest aspect, intellectual and chivalrous nobility.

“You—you see, monsieur,” said the Marquis, hesitation returning, “you see that Justice may look in—here at any time—yes, at any time—here. If there is anybody crazy, it can only be the children—the children—who are a little crazy about their father, and the father who is very crazy about his children—but that sort of madness rings true.”

At this juncture Madame Jeanrenaud’s voice was heard in the ante-room, and the good woman bustled in despite the man-servant’s remonstrances.

“I take no roundabout ways, I can tell you!” she exclaimed. “Yes, Monsieur le Marquis, I want to speak to you this very minute,” she went on, with a bow to the company. “By George, and I am too late as it is, since Monsieur the criminal Judge is before me.”

“Criminal!” cried the two boys.

“Good reason why I did not find you at your own house, since you are here. Well, well! the Law is always to the fore when there is mischief brewing.—I came, Monsieur le Marquis, to tell you that my son and I are of one mind to give you everything back, since our honor is threatened. My son and I would rather give you back everything than cause you the smallest trouble. My word, they must be as stupid as pans without handles to call you a lunatic—”

“A lunatic! My father?” exclaimed the boys, clinging to the Marquis. “What is this?”

“Silence, madame,” said Popinot.

“Children, leave us,” said the Marquis.

The two boys went into the garden without a word, very much alarmed.

“Madame,” said the judge, “the moneys paid to you by Monsieur le Marquis were legally due, though given to you in virtue of a very far-reaching theory of honesty. If all people possessed of confiscated goods, however acquired, were compelled to make restitution every hundred and fifty years, there would be few legitimate owners in France. The possessions of Jacques Coeur enriched twenty noble families; confiscations pronounced by the English made fortunes for several houses.

“Our law allows M. d’Espard to dispose of his income without accounting for it or suffering accusation of misapplication. A Commission in Lunacy can only be granted when actions are devoid of reason; but in this case the remittances to you have a reason based on the most sacred and honorable motives. Hence you may keep it all without remorse and let the world misinterpret a noble action. In Paris, the highest virtue is the object of foul calumny. It is the present condition of society that makes the Marquis’ actions sublime. For the honor of my country, I would that such deeds were regarded as a matter of course; but, as things are, I am forced by comparison to look upon M. d’Espard as a man to whom a crown should be awarded rather than threatened with a Commission in Lunacy.

“In a long career, I have seen and heard nothing that touched me more deeply than what I have just seen and heard. But it is not extraordinary that virtue should wear its noblest aspect when practised by men of the highest class.

“Having expressed myself thus, I hope, Monsieur le Marquis, you feel certain of my silence and will not be uneasy as to the decision—if it comes before the Court.”

“There, now! Well said,” cried Madame Jeanrenaud. “That is something like a judge! Look here, my dear sir, I would hug you if I were not so ugly; you speak like a book.”

The Marquis held out his hand to Popinot, who gently pressed it with a look full of sympathetic comprehension, and the Marquis returned the smile. These two natures, one commonplace but divinely kind, the other lofty and sublime, had fallen into unison without a jar, as though two pure lights had merged. The father of a whole district felt himself worthy to grasp the hand of this man who was doubly noble, and the Marquis felt in his soul an instinct that the judge’s hand was one from which beneficence perennially flows.

“Monsieur le Marquis,” added Popinot, with a bow, “I am happy to tell you that, from the first words of this inquiry, I regarded my clerk as quite unnecessary.”

He went close to M. d’Espard, led him into the window-bay, and said: “It is time you should return home, monsieur. I believe Madame la Marquise has acted under an influence you ought at once to counteract.”

Popinot withdrew. He looked back several times crossing the courtyard, touched by the scene. It was one of those which take root in memory to blossom in hours when the soul seeks consolation.

“Those rooms would just suit me,” he said to himself as he reached home. “If M. d’Espard leaves them, I will take up his lease.”

The next day, about ten in the morning, Popinot, who had written his report the previous evening, went to the Palais de Justice, intending prompt and righteous action. As he went to the robing-room to put on his gown and bands, the usher told him the President of his Court begged him to attend in his private room. Popinot obeyed.

“Good-morning, my dear Popinot,” said the President, “I have been waiting for you.”

“Why, Monsieur le Président, is anything wrong?”

“A mere silly trifle,” said the President. “The Keeper of the Seals, with whom I dined yesterday, led me aside. He had heard you had been to tea with Madame d’Espard, in whose case you were employed. He suggested it would be as well that you should not sit on this case—”

“But, Monsieur le Président, I can prove I left Madame d’Espard’s house when tea was brought in. And my conscience—”

“Yes, yes; the whole Bench, the two Courts, all the profession know you. I need not repeat what I said to his Eminence; but you know, ‘Caesar’s wife must not be suspected.’ We shall not make this a matter of discipline, but only of proprieties. Between ourselves, it is not on your account, but on that of the Bench.”

“But, monsieur, if you only knew the kind of woman—” said the judge, trying to pull his report from his pocket.

“I am perfectly certain you proceeded with strict independence. I myself, in the provinces, have often taken more than a cup of tea with the people I tried; but the Keeper mentioned it, and you might be talked about. Any conflict with public opinion is dangerous for a constitutional body, even when right is on its side, because our weapons are not equal. Journalism may say or suppose anything, and our dignity forbids reply. I have spoken of this to your President, and M. Camusot has been appointed in your place upon your retirement, which you will signify. It is a family matter, so to speak. And I beg you to signify your retirement from the case as a personal favor. To make up, you will get the Cross of the Legion of Honor, which has long been due to you. I make that my business.”

When he saw M. Camusot, a judge recently called to Paris from a provincial Court, Popinot could not repress an ironical smile. This pale, fair young man, full of covert ambition, looked ready to hang and unhang at the pleasure of any earthy king, the innocent and the guilty alike.

Popinot withdrew with a bow; he scorned to deny the lying accusation brought against him.

PARIS, February 1836.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Note: The Commission in Lunacy is also known as The Interdiction and is referred to by that title in certain of the addendums.

- Bianchon, Horace
  - Father Goriot
  - The Atheist’s Mass
  - Cesar Birotteau
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - The Secrets of a Princess
  - The Government Clerks
  - Pierrette
  - A Study of Woman
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Honorine
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - The Magic Skin
  - A Second Home
  - A Prince of Bohemia
  - Letters of Two Brides
  - The Muse of the Department
  - The Imaginary Mistress
  - The Middle Classes
  - Cousin Betty
  - The Country Parson
  In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:
  - Another Study of Woman
  - La Grande Bretèche

- Bordin
  - The Gondreville Mystery
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - Jealousies of a Country Town

- Camusot de Marville
  - Cousin Pons
  - Jealousies of a Country Town
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

- Desroches (son)
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - Colonel Chabert
  - A Start in Life
  - A Woman of Thirty
  - The Government Clerks
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - The Firm of Nucingen
  - A Man of Business
  - The Middle Classes

- Espard, Charles-Maurice-Marie-Andoche, Comte de Negrepelisse, Marquis d’
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

- Espard, Chevalier d’
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - The Secrets of a Princess

- Espard, Jeanne-Clementine-Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d’
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Letters of Two Brides
  - Another Study of Woman
  - The Gondreville Mystery
  - The Secrets of a Princess
  - A Daughter of Eve
  - Béatrix

- Godeschal, François-Claude-Marie
  - Colonel Chabert
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - A Start in Life
  - The Middle Classes
  - Cousin Pons

- Grozier, Abbé
  - Lost Illusions

- Jeanrenaud
  - Albert Savarus

- Mongenod, Frédéric
  - The Seamy Side of History

- Négrepelisse, De
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

- Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de
  - Father Goriot
  - The Thirteen
  - Eugénie Grandet
  - César Birotteau
  - Melmoth Reconciled
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Modeste Mignon
  - The Firm of Nucingen
  - Another Study of Woman
  - A Daughter of Eve
  - The Member for Arcis

- Popinot, Jean-Jules
  - César Birotteau
  - Honorine
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - The Middle Classes

- Rabourdin, Madame
  - The Government Clerks

End of Project Gutenberg’s The Commission in Lunacy, by Honoré de Balzac
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################