Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

HONORINE

By Honore De Balzac

Translated by Clara Bell

DEDICATION

To Monsieur Achille Deveria

An affectionate remembrance from the Author.

HONORINE

If the French have as great an aversion for traveling as the English
have a propensity for it, both English and French perhaps have
sufficient reasons. Something better than England is everywhere to be
found; whereas it is excessively difficult to find the charms of France
outside France. Other countries can show admirable scenery, and they
frequently offer greater comfort than that of France, which makes but
slow progress in that particular. They sometimes display bewildering
magnificence, grandeur, and luxury; they lack neither grace nor noble
manners; but the life of the brain, the talent for conversation, the
“Attic salt” so familiar at Paris, the prompt apprehension of what one
is thinking, but does not say, the spirit of the unspoken, which is half
the French language, is nowhere else to be met with. Hence a Frenchman,
whose raillery, as it is, finds so little comprehension, would wither
in a foreign land like an uprooted tree. Emigration is counter to the
instincts of the French nation. Many Frenchmen of the kind here in
question have owned to pleasure at seeing the custom-house officers
of their native land, which may seem the most daring hyperbole of
patriotism.

This preamble is intended to recall to such Frenchmen as have traveled
the extreme pleasure they have felt on occasionally finding their native
land, like an oasis, in the drawing-room of some diplomat: a pleasure
hard to understand by those who have never left the asphalt of the
Boulevard des Italiens, and to whom the Quais of the left bank of the
Seine are not really Paris. To find Paris again! Do you know what that
means, O Parisians? It is to find—not indeed the cookery of the Rocher
de Cancale as Borel elaborates it for those who can appreciate it, for
that exists only in the Rue Montorgueil—but a meal which reminds you
of it! It is to find the wines of France, which out of France are to be
regarded as myths, and as rare as the woman of whom I write! It is
to find—not the most fashionable pleasantry, for it loses its aroma
between Paris and the frontier—but the witty understanding, the
critical atmosphere in which the French live, from the poet down to the
artisan, from the duchess to the boy in the street.

In 1836, when the Sardinian Court was residing at Genoa, two Parisians,
more or less famous, could fancy themselves still in Paris when they
found themselves in a palazzo, taken by the French Consul-General, on
the hill forming the last fold of the Apennines between the gate of San
Tomaso and the well-known lighthouse, seen in all the keepsake views of
Genoa. This palazzo is one of the magnificent villas on which Genoese
nobles were wont to spend millions when the aristocratic republic was a
power.

If the early night is beautiful anywhere, it surely is at Genoa, after
it has rained as it can rain there, in torrents, all the morning; when
the clearness of the sea vies with that of the sky; when silence reigns
on the quay and in the groves of the villa, and over the marble heads
with yawning jaws from which water mysteriously flows; when the stars
beam; when the waves of the Mediterranean lap one after another like the
avowal of a woman, from whom you drag it word by word. It must be
confessed that the moment when the perfumed air brings fragrance to the
lungs and to our day-dreams; when voluptuousness, made visible and
ambient as the air, holds you in your easy-chair; when, a spoon in your
hand, you sip an ice or a sorbet, the town at your feet and fair woman
opposite—such Boccaccio hours can be known only in Italy and on the
shores of the Mediterranean.

Imagine round the table the Marquis di Negro, a knight hospitaller to
all men of talent on their travels, and the Marquis Damaso Pareto, two
Frenchmen disguised as Genoese, a Consul-General with a wife as
beautiful as a Madonna, and two silent children—silent because sleep
has fallen on them—the French Ambassador and his wife, a secretary to
the Embassy who believes himself to be crushed and mischievous; finally,
two Parisians, who have come to take leave of the Consul’s wife at a
splendid dinner, and you will have the picture presented by the terrace
of the villa about the middle of May—a picture in which the
predominant figure was that of a celebrated woman, on whom all eyes
centered now and again, the heroine of this improvised festival.

One of the two Frenchmen was the famous landscape painter, Leon de Lora;
the other a well-known critic, Claude Vignon. They had both come with
this lady, one of the glories of the fair sex, Mademoiselle des Touches,
known in the literary world by the name of Camille Maupin.

Mademoiselle des Touches had been to Florence on business. With the
charming kindness of which she is prodigal, she had brought Leon de
Lora to show him Italy, and had gone on as far as Rome that he might see
the Campagna. She had come by Simplon, and was returning by the Cornice
road to Marseilles. She had stopped at Genoa again on the landscape
painter’s account. The Consul-General had, of course, wished to do the
honors of Genoa to a woman whose wealth, name, and position recommend her
no less than her talents. Camille Maupin, who knew her Genoa down to its
smallest chapels, had left her landscape painter to the care of the
diplomat and the two Genoese marquises, and was miserly of her minutes.
Though the ambassador was a distinguished man of letters, the celebrated
lady had refused to yield to his advances, dreading what the English
call an exhibition; but she drew in the claws of her refusals when it
was proposed they should spend a farewell day at the Consul’s villa. Leon
de Lora had told Camille that her presence at the villa was the only
return he could make to the Ambassador and his wife, the two Genoese
noblemen, the Consul and his wife. So Mademoiselle des Touches had
sacrificed one of those days of perfect freedom, which are not always
to be had in Paris by those on whom the world has its eye.

Now, the meeting being accounted for, it is easy to understand that
etiquette had been banished, as well as many women even of the highest
rank, who were curious to know whether Camille Maupin’s manly talent
impaired her grace as a pretty woman, and to see, in a word, whether the
trousers showed below her petticoats. After dinner till nine o’clock,
when a collation was served, though the conversation had been gay and
grave by turns, and constantly enlivened by Leon de Lora’s sallies—for
he is considered the most roguish wit of Paris to-day—and by the good
taste which will surprise no one after the list of guests, literature had
scarcely been mentioned. However, the butterfly flittings of this French
tilting match were certain to come to it, were it only to flutter over
this essentially French subject. But before coming to the turn in the
conversation which led the Consul-General to speak, it will not be out
of place to give some account of him and his family.

This diplomat, a man of four-and-thirty, who had been married about six
years, was the living portrait of Lord Byron. The familiarity of that
face makes a description unnecessary. It may, however, be noted that
there was no affectation in his dreamy expression. Lord Byron was a
poet, and the Consul was poetical; women know and recognize the
difference, which explains without justifying some of their attachments.
His handsome face, thrown into relief by a delightful nature, had
captivated a Genoese heiress. A Genoese heiress! the expression might
raise a smile at Genoa, where, in consequence of the inability of
daughters to inherit, a woman is rarely rich; but Onorina Pedrotti, the
only child of a banker without heirs male, was an exception. Notwithstanding
all the flattering advances prompted by a spontaneous passion, the
Consul-General had not seemed to wish to marry. Nevertheless, after
living in the town for two years, and after certain steps taken by the
Ambassador during his visits to the Genoese Court, the marriage was
decided on. The young man withdrew his former refusal less on account of
the touching affection of Onorina Pedrotti than by reason of an unknown
incident, one of those crises of private life which are so instantly
buried under the daily tide of interests that, later, the most natural
actions seem inexplicable.

This involution of causes sometimes affects the most serious events of
history. This, at any rate, was the opinion of the town of Genoa, where,
to some women, the extreme reserve, the melancholy of the French
Consul could be explained only by the word passion. It may be remarked,
in passing, that women never complain of being the victims of a
preference; they are very ready to immolate themselves for the common
weal. Onorina Pedrotti, who might have hated the Consul if she had been
altogether scorned, loved her sposo no less, and perhaps more, when she
know that he had loved. Women allow precedence in love affairs. All is
well if other women are in question.

A man is not a diplomat with impunity: the sposo was as secret as the
grave—so secret that the merchants of Genoa chose to regard the young
Consul’s attitude as premeditated, and the heiress might perhaps have
slipped through his fingers if he had not played his part of a lovesick
malade imaginaire. If it was real, the women thought it too degrading to
be believed.

Pedrotti’s daughter gave him her love as a consolation; she lulled these
unknown griefs in a cradle of tenderness and Italian caresses.

Il Signor Pedrotti had indeed no reason to complain of the choice to
which he was driven by his beloved child. Powerful protectors in Paris
watched over the young diplomat’s fortunes. In accordance with a promise
made by the Ambassador to the Consul-General’s father-in-law, the young
man was created Baron and Commander of the Legion of Honor. Signor
Pedrotti himself was made a Count by the King of Sardinia. Onorina’s
dower was a million of francs. As to the fortune of the Casa Pedrotti,
estimated at two millions, made in the corn trade, the young couple came
into it within six months of their marriage, for the first and last Count
Pedrotti died in January 1831.

Onorina Pedrotti is one of those beautiful Genoese women who, when
beautiful, are the most magnificent creatures in Italy. Michael Angelo
took his models in Genoa for the tomb of Giuliano. Hence the fulness
and singular placing of the breast in the figures of Day and Night,
which so many critics have thought exaggerated, but which is peculiar to
the women of Liguria. A Genoese beauty is no longer to be found except
under the mezzaro, as at Venice it is met with only under the fazzioli.
This phenomenon is observed among all fallen nations. The noble type
survives only among the populace, as after the burning of a town coins
are found hidden in the ashes. And Onorina, an exception as regards her
fortune, is no less an exceptional patrician beauty. Recall the figure of
Night that Michael Angelo has placed at the feet of the Pensieroso, dress
her in modern garb, twist that long hair round the magnificent head, a
little dark in complexion, set a spark of fire in those dreamy eyes,
throw a scarf about the massive bosom, see the long dress, white,
embroidered with flowers, imagine the statue sitting upright, with her
arms folded like those of Mademoiselle Georges, and you will see before
you the Consul’s wife, with a boy of six, as handsome as a mother’s
desire, and a little girl of four on her knees, as beautiful as the type
of childhood so laboriously sought out by the sculptor David to grace a
tomb.

This beautiful family was the object of Camille’s secret study. It
struck Mademoiselle des Touches that the Consul looked rather too
absent-minded for a perfectly happy man.

Although, throughout the day, the husband and wife had offered her the
pleasing spectacle of complete happiness, Camille wondered why one of
the most superior men she had ever met, and whom she had seen too
in Paris drawing-rooms, remained as Consul-General at Genoa when he
possessed a fortune of a hundred odd thousand francs a year. But, at the
same time, she had discerned, by many of the little nothings which women
perceive with the intelligence of the Arab sage in Zadig, that the
husband was faithfully devoted. These two handsome creatures would no
doubt love each other without a misunderstanding till the end of their
days. So Camille said to herself alternately, “What is wrong?—Nothing
is wrong,” following the misleading symptoms of the Consul’s demeanor;
and he, it may be said, had the absolute calmness of Englishmen, of
savages, of Orientals, and of consummate diplomatists.

In discussing literature, they spoke of the perennial stock-in-trade
of the republic of letters—woman’s sin. And they presently found
themselves confronted by two opinions: When a woman sins, is the man
or the woman to blame? The three women present—the Ambassadress, the
Consul’s wife, and Mademoiselle des Touches, women of blameless
reputations—were without pity for the woman. The men tried to convince
these fair flowers of their sex that some virtues might remain in a
woman after she had fallen.

“How long are we going to play at hide-and-seek in this way?” said Leon
de Lora.

“Cara vita, go and put your children to bed, and send me by Gina the
little black pocket-book that lies on my Boule cabinet,” said the Consul
to his wife.

She rose without a reply, which shows that she loved her husband very
truly, for she already knew French enough to understand that her husband
was getting rid of her.

“I will tell you a story in which I played a part, and after that we can
discuss it, for it seems to me childish to practise with the scalpel on
an imaginary body. Begin by dissecting a corpse.”

Everyone prepared to listen, with all the greater readiness because
they had all talked enough, and this is the moment to be chosen for
telling a story. This, then, is the Consul-General’s tale:—

“When I was two-and-twenty, and had taken my degree in law, my old
uncle, the Abbe Loraux, then seventy-two years old, felt it necessary
to provide me with a protector, and to start me in some career. This
excellent man, if not indeed a saint, regarded each year of his life as
a fresh gift from God. I need not tell you that the father confessor of
a Royal Highness had no difficulty in finding a place for a young man
brought up by himself, his sister’s only child. So one day, towards the
end of the year 1824, this venerable old man, who for five years had
been Cure of the White Friars at Paris, came up to the room I had in his
house, and said:

“‘Get yourself dressed, my dear boy; I am going to introduce you to
some one who is willing to engage you as secretary. If I am not
mistaken, he may fill my place in the event of God’s taking me to
Himself. I shall have finished mass at nine o’clock; you have
three-quarters of an hour before you. Be ready.’

“‘What, uncle! must I say good-bye to this room, where for four years I
have been so happy?’

“‘I have no fortune to leave you,’ said he.

“‘Have you not the reputation of your name to leave me, the memory of
your good works—’

“‘We need say nothing of that inheritance,’ he replied, smiling. ‘You do
not yet know enough of the world to be aware that a legacy of that kind
is hardly likely to be paid, whereas by taking you this morning to M. le
Comte’—Allow me,” said the Consul, interrupting himself, “to speak
of my protector by his Christian name only, and to call him Comte
Octave.—‘By taking you this morning to M. le Comte Octave, I hope to
secure you his patronage, which, if you are so fortunate as to please
that virtuous statesman—as I make no doubt you can—will be worth, at
least, as much as the fortune I might have accumulated for you, if my
brother-in-law’s ruin and my sister’s death had not fallen on me like a
thunder-bolt from a clear sky.’

“‘Are you the Count’s director?’

“‘If I were, could I place you with him? What priest could be capable
of taking advantage of the secrets which he learns at the tribunal of
repentance? No; you owe this position to his Highness, the Keeper of the
Seals. My dear Maurice, you will be as much at home there as in your
father’s house. The Count will give you a salary of two thousand four
hundred francs, rooms in his house, and an allowance of twelve hundred
francs in lieu of feeding you. He will not admit you to his table, nor
give you a separate table, for fear of leaving you to the care of
servants. I did not accept the offer when it was made to me till I was
perfectly certain that Comte Octave’s secretary was never to be a mere
upper servant. You will have an immense amount of work, for the Count
is a great worker; but when you leave him, you will be qualified to fill
the highest posts. I need not warn you to be discreet; that is the
first virtue of any man who hopes to hold public appointments.’

“You may conceive my curiosity. Comte Octave, at that time, held one of
the highest legal appointments; he was in the confidence of Madame the
Dauphiness, who had just got him made a State Minister; he led such a
life as the Comte de Serizy, whom you all know, I think; but even more
quietly, for his house was in the Marais, Rue Payenne, and he hardly
ever entertained. His private life escaped public comment by its
hermit-like simplicity and by constant hard work.

“Let me describe my position in a few words. Having found in the
solemn headmaster of the College Saint-Louis a tutor to whom my uncle
delegated his authority, at the age of eighteen I had gone through all
the classes; I left school as innocent as a seminarist, full of faith,
on quitting Saint-Sulpice. My mother, on her deathbed, had made my uncle
promise that I should not become a priest, but I was as pious as though
I had to take orders. On leaving college, the Abbe Loraux took me into
his house and made me study law. During the four years of study
requisite for passing all the examinations, I worked hard, but chiefly
at things outside the arid fields of jurisprudence. Weaned from
literature as I had been at college, where I lived in the headmaster’s
house, I had a thirst to quench. As soon as I had read a few modern
masterpieces, the works of all the preceding ages were greedily
swallowed. I became crazy about the theatre, and for a long time I went
every night to the play, though my uncle gave me only a hundred francs
a month. This parsimony, to which the good old man was compelled by his
regard for the poor, had the effect of keeping a young man’s desires
within reasonable limits.

“When I went to live with Comte Octave I was not indeed an innocent, but
I thought of my rare escapades as crimes. My uncle was so truly angelic,
and I was so much afraid of grieving him, that in all those four years
I had never spent a night out. The good man would wait till I came in
to go to bed. This maternal care had more power to keep me within bounds
than the sermons and reproaches with which the life of a young man
is diversified in a puritanical home. I was a stranger to the various
circles which make up the world of Paris society; I only knew some women
of the better sort, and none of the inferior class but those I saw as I
walked about, or in the boxes at the play, and then only from the depths
of the pit where I sat. If, at that period, anyone had said to me, ‘You
will see Canalis, or Camille Maupin,’ I should have felt hot coals in
my head and in my bowels. Famous people were to me as gods, who neither
spoke, nor walked, nor ate like other mortals.

“How many tales of the Thousand-and-one Nights are comprehended in the
ripening of a youth! How many wonderful lamps must we have rubbed before
we understand that the True Wonderful Lamp is either luck, or work, or
genius. In some men this dream of the aroused spirit is brief; mine has
lasted until now! In those days I always went to sleep as Grand Duke
of Tuscany,—as a millionaire,—as beloved by a princess,—or famous! So
to enter the service of Comte Octave, and have a hundred louis a year,
was entering on independent life. I had glimpses of some chance of
getting into society, and seeking for what my heart desired most, a
protectress, who would rescue me from the paths of danger which a young
man of two-and-twenty can hardly help treading, however prudent and well
brought up he may be. I began to be afraid of myself.

“The persistent study of other people’s rights into which I had plunged
was not always enough to repress painful imaginings. Yes, sometimes in
fancy I threw myself into theatrical life; I thought I could be a great
actor; I dreamed of endless triumphs and loves, knowing nothing of the
disillusion hidden behind the curtain—for every stage has its reverse
behind the scenes. I have gone out sometimes, my heart boiling, carried
away by an impulse to rush hunting through Paris, to attach myself to
some handsome woman I might meet, to follow her to her door, watch her,
write to her, throw myself on her mercy, and conquer her by sheer force
of passion. My poor uncle, a heart consumed by charity, a child of
seventy years, as clear-sighted as God, as guileless as a man of genius,
no doubt read the tumult of my soul; for when he felt the tether by
which he held me strained too tightly and ready to break, he would never
fail to say, ‘Here, Maurice, you too are poor! Here are twenty francs;
go and amuse yourself, you are not a priest!’ And if you could have seen
the dancing light that gilded his gray eyes, the smile that relaxed his
fine lips, puckering the corners of his mouth, the adorable expression
of that august face, whose native ugliness was redeemed by the spirit
of an apostle, you would understand the feeling which made me answer the
Cure of White Friars only with a kiss, as if he had been my mother.

“‘In Comte Octave you will find not a master, but a friend,’ said my
uncle on the way to the Rue Payenne. ‘But he is distrustful, or to be
more exact, he is cautious. The statesman’s friendship can be won only
with time; for in spite of his deep insight and his habit of gauging
men, he was deceived by the man you are succeeding, and nearly became a
victim to his abuse of confidence. This is enough to guide you in your
behavior to him.’

“When we knocked at the enormous outer door of a house as large as the
Hotel Carnavalet, with a courtyard in front and a garden behind, the
sound rang as in a desert. While my uncle inquired of an old porter in
livery if the Count were at home, I cast my eyes, seeing everything at
once, over the courtyard where cobblestones were hidden in the grass,
the blackened walls where little gardens flourished above elegant
architecture, and on the roof, as high as that of the Tuileries. The
balustrade of the upper balconies was eaten away. Through a magnificent
colonnade I could see a second court on one side, where were the
offices; the door was rotting. An old coachman was there cleaning an
old carriage. The indifferent air of this servant allowed me to assume
that the handsome stables, where of old so many horses had whinnied,
now sheltered two at most. The handsome facade of the house seemed to me
gloomy, like that of a mansion belonging to the State or the Crown, and
given up to some public office. A bell rang as we walked across, my
uncle and I, from the porter’s lodge—Inquire of the Porter was still
written over the door—towards the outside steps, where a footman came
out in a livery like that of Labranche at the Theatre Francais in the old
stock plays. A visitor was so rare that the servant was putting his coat
on when he opened a glass door with small panes, on each side of which
the smoke of a lamp had traced patterns on the walls.

“A hall so magnificent as to be worthy of Versailles ended in a
staircase such as will never again be built in France, taking up as much
space as the whole of a modern house. As we went up the marble steps,
as cold as tombstones, and wide enough for eight persons to walk abreast,
our tread echoed under sonorous vaulting. The banister charmed the eye
by its miraculous workmanship—goldsmith’s work in iron—wrought by the
fancy of an artist of the time of Henri III. Chilled as by an icy mantle
that fell on our shoulders, we went through ante-rooms, drawing-rooms
opening one out of the other, with carpetless parquet floors, and
furnished with such splendid antiquities as would find their way to the
curiosity dealers. At last we reached a large study in a cross wing,
with all the windows looking into an immense garden.

“‘Monsieur le Cure of the White Friars, and his nephew, Monsieur de
l’Hostal,’ said Labranche, to whose care the other theatrical servant
had consigned us in the first ante-chamber.

“Comte Octave, dressed in long trousers and a gray flannel morning coat,
rose from his seat by a huge writing-table, came to the fireplace,
and signed to me to sit down, while he went forward to take my uncle’s
hands, which he pressed.

“‘Though I am in the parish of Saint-Paul,’ said he, ‘I could scarcely
have failed to hear of the Cure of the White Friars, and I am happy to
make his acquaintance.’

“‘Your Excellency is most kind,’ replied my uncle. ‘I have brought to
you my only remaining relation. While I believe that I am offering a
good gift to your Excellency, I hope at the same time to give my nephew
a second father.’

“‘As to that, I can only reply, Monsieur l’Abbe, when we shall have
tried each other,’ said Comte Octave. ‘Your name?’ he added to me.

“‘Maurice.’

“‘He has taken his doctor’s degree in law,’ my uncle observed.

“‘Very good, very good!’ said the Count, looking at me from head to
foot. ‘Monsieur l’Abbe, I hope that for your nephew’s sake in the first
instance, and then for mine, you will do me the honor of dining here
every Monday. That will be our family dinner, our family party.’

“My uncle and the Count then began to talk of religion from the
political point of view, of charitable institutes, the repression of
crime, and I could at my leisure study the man on whom my fate would
henceforth depend. The Count was of middle height; it was impossible to
judge of his build on account of his dress, but he seemed to me to be
lean and spare. His face was harsh and hollow; the features were
refined. His mouth, rather large, expressed both irony and kindness.
His forehead perhaps too spacious, was as intimidating as that of a
madman, all the more so from the contrast of the lower part of the
face, which ended squarely in a short chin very near the lower lip.
Small eyes, of turquoise blue, were as keen and bright as those of the
Prince de Talleyrand—which I admired at a later time—and endowed, like
the Prince’s, with the faculty of becoming expressionless to the verge
of gloom; and they added to the singularity of a face that was not pale
but yellow. This complexion seemed to bespeak an irritable temper and
violent passions. His hair, already silvered, and carefully dressed,
seemed to furrow his head with streaks of black and white alternately.
The trimness of this head spoiled the resemblance I had remarked in the
Count to the wonderful monk described by Lewis after Schedoni in the
Confessional of the Black Penitents (The Italian), a superior
creation, as it seems to me, to The Monk.

“The Count was already shaved, having to attend early at the law courts.
Two candelabra with four lights, screened by lamp-shades, were still
burning at the opposite ends of the writing-table, and showed plainly
that the magistrate rose long before daylight. His hands, which I saw
when he took hold of the bell-pull to summon his servant, were extremely
fine, and as white as a woman’s.

“As I tell you this story,” said the Consul-General, interrupting
himself, “I am altering the titles and the social position of this
gentleman, while placing him in analogous circumstances to what his
really were. His profession, rank, luxury, fortune, and style of living
were the same; all these details are true, but I would not be false to
my benefactor, nor to my usual habits of discretion.

“Instead of feeling—as I really was, socially speaking—an insect in
the presence of an eagle,” the narrator went on after a pause, “I felt I
know not what indefinable impression from the Count’s appearance,
which, however, I can now account for. Artists of genius” (and he
bowed gracefully to the Ambassador, the distinguished lady, and the
two Frenchmen), “real statesmen, poets, a general who has commanded
armies—in short, all really great minds are simple, and their
simplicity places you on a level with themselves.—You who are all of
superior minds,” he said, addressing his guests, “have perhaps observed
how feeling can bridge over the distances created by society. If we
are inferior to you in intellect, we can be your equals in devoted
friendship. By the temperature—allow me the word—of our hearts I felt
myself as near my patron as I was far below him in rank. In short, the
soul has its clairvoyance; it has presentiments of suffering, grief,
joy, antagonism, or hatred in others.

“I vaguely discerned the symptoms of a mystery, from recognizing in the
Count the same effects of physiognomy as I had observed in my uncle.
The exercise of virtue, serenity of conscience, and purity of mind had
transfigured my uncle, who from being ugly had become quite beautiful.
I detected a metamorphosis of a reverse kind in the Count’s face; at the
first glance I thought he was about fifty-five, but after an attentive
examination I found youth entombed under the ice of a great sorrow,
under the fatigue of persistent study, under the glowing hues of some
suppressed passion. At a word from my uncle the Count’s eyes recovered
for a moment the softness of the periwinkle flower, and he had an
admiring smile, which revealed what I believed to be his real age,
about forty. These observations I made, not then but afterwards, as I
recalled the circumstances of my visit.

“The man-servant came in carrying a tray with his master’s breakfast on
it.

“‘I did not ask for breakfast,’ remarked the Count; ‘but leave it, and
show monsieur to his rooms.’

“I followed the servant, who led the way to a complete set of pretty
rooms, under a terrace, between the great courtyard and the servants’
quarters, over a corridor of communication between the kitchens and
the grand staircase. When I returned to the Count’s study, I overheard,
before opening the door, my uncle pronouncing this judgment on me:

“‘He may do wrong, for he has strong feelings, and we are all liable to
honorable mistakes; but he has no vices.’

“‘Well,’ said the Count, with a kindly look, ‘do you like yourself
there? Tell me. There are so many rooms in this barrack that, if you
were not comfortable, I could put you elsewhere.’

“‘At my uncle’s I had but one room,’ replied I.

“‘Well, you can settle yourself this evening,’ said the Count, ‘for your
possessions, no doubt, are such as all students own, and a hackney coach
will be enough to convey them. To-day we will all three dine together,’
and he looked at my uncle.

“A splendid library opened from the Count’s study, and he took us in
there, showing me a pretty little recess decorated with paintings, which
had formerly served, no doubt, as an oratory.

“‘This is your cell,’ said he. ‘You will sit there when you have to work
with me, for you will not be tethered by a chain;’ and he explained in
detail the kind and duration of my employment with him. As I listened I
felt that he was a great political teacher.

“It took me about a month to familiarize myself with people and things,
to learn the duties of my new office, and accustom myself to the Count’s
methods. A secretary necessarily watches the man who makes use of him.
That man’s tastes, passions, temper, and manias become the subject of
involuntary study. The union of their two minds is at once more and less
than a marriage.

“During these months the Count and I reciprocally studied each other. I
learned with astonishment that Comte Octave was but thirty-seven years
old. The merely superficial peacefulness of his life and the propriety
of his conduct were the outcome not solely of a deep sense of duty and
of stoical reflection; in my constant intercourse with this man—an
extraordinary man to those who knew him well—I felt vast depths beneath
his toil, beneath his acts of politeness, his mask of benignity, his
assumption of resignation, which so closely resembled calmness that it
is easy to mistake it. Just as when walking through forest-lands certain
soils give forth under our feet a sound which enables us to guess
whether they are dense masses of stone or a void; so intense egoism,
though hidden under the flowers of politeness, and subterranean caverns
eaten out by sorrow sound hollow under the constant touch of familiar
life. It was sorrow and not despondency that dwelt in that really great
soul. The Count had understood that actions, deeds, are the supreme law
of social man. And he went on his way in spite of secret wounds, looking
to the future with a tranquil eye, like a martyr full of faith.

“His concealed sadness, the bitter disenchantment from which he
suffered, had not led him into philosophical deserts of incredulity;
this brave statesman was religious, without ostentation; he always
attended the earliest mass at Saint-Paul’s for pious workmen and
servants. Not one of his friends, no one at Court, knew that he so
punctually fulfilled the practice of religion. He was addicted to God as
some men are addicted to a vice, with the greatest mystery. Thus one day
I came to find the Count at the summit of an Alp of woe much higher than
that on which many are who think themselves the most tried; who laugh at
the passions and the beliefs of others because they have conquered their
own; who play variations in every key of irony and disdain. He did not
mock at those who still follow hope into the swamps whither she leads,
nor those who climb a peak to be alone, nor those who persist in the
fight, reddening the arena with their blood and strewing it with their
illusions. He looked on the world as a whole; he mastered its beliefs;
he listened to its complaining; he was doubtful of affection, and yet
more of self-sacrifice; but this great and stern judge pitied them,
or admired them, not with transient enthusiasm, but with silence,
concentration, and the communion of a deeply-touched soul. He was a sort
of catholic Manfred, and unstained by crime, carrying his choiceness
into his faith, melting the snows by the fires of a sealed volcano,
holding converse with a star seen by himself alone!

“I detected many dark riddles in his ordinary life. He evaded my gaze
not like a traveler who, following a path, disappears from time to time
in dells or ravines according to the formation of the soil, but like a
sharpshooter who is being watched, who wants to hide himself, and seeks
a cover. I could not account for his frequent absences at the times when
he was working the hardest, and of which he made no secret from me, for
he would say, ‘Go on with this for me,’ and trust me with the work in
hand.

“This man, wrapped in the threefold duties of the statesman, the judge,
and the orator, charmed me by a taste for flowers, which shows an
elegant mind, and which is shared by almost all persons of refinement.
His garden and his study were full of the rarest plants, but he always
bought them half-withered. Perhaps it pleased him to see such an image
of his own fate! He was faded like these dying flowers, whose almost
decaying fragrance mounted strangely to his brain. The Count loved his
country; he devoted himself to public interests with the frenzy of a
heart that seeks to cheat some other passion; but the studies and work
into which he threw himself were not enough for him; there were
frightful struggles in his mind, of which some echoes reached me.
Finally, he would give utterance to harrowing aspirations for happiness,
and it seemed to me he ought yet to be happy; but what was the obstacle?
Was there a woman he loved? This was a question I asked myself. You may
imagine the extent of the circles of torment that my mind had searched
before coming to so simple and so terrible a question. Notwithstanding
his efforts, my patron did not succeed in stifling the movements of his
heart. Under his austere manner, under the reserve of the magistrate, a
passion rebelled, though coerced with such force that no one but I
who lived with him ever guessed the secret. His motto seemed to be,
‘I suffer, and am silent.’ The escort of respect and admiration
which attended him; the friendship of workers as valiant as
himself—Grandville and Serizy, both presiding judges—had no hold over
the Count: either he told them nothing, or they knew all. Impassible and
lofty in public, the Count betrayed the man only on rare intervals when,
alone in his garden or his study, he supposed himself unobserved; but
then he was a child again, he gave course to the tears hidden beneath
the toga, to the excitement which, if wrongly interpreted, might have
damaged his credit for perspicacity as a statesman.

“When all this had become to me a matter of certainty, Comte Octave had
all the attractions of a problem, and won on my affection as much as
though he had been my own father. Can you enter into the feeling of
curiosity, tempered by respect? What catastrophe had blasted this
learned man, who, like Pitt, had devoted himself from the age of
eighteen to the studies indispensable to power, while he had no
ambition; this judge, who thoroughly knew the law of nations, political
law, civil and criminal law, and who could find in these a weapon
against every anxiety, against every mistake; this profound legislator,
this serious writer, this pious celibate whose life sufficiently proved
that he was open to no reproach? A criminal could not have been more
hardly punished by God than was my master; sorrow had robbed him of half
his slumbers; he never slept more than four hours. What struggle was
it that went on in the depths of these hours apparently so calm, so
studious, passing without a sound or a murmur, during which I often
detected him, when the pen had dropped from his fingers, with his head
resting on one hand, his eyes like two fixed stars, and sometimes wet
with tears? How could the waters of that living spring flow over the
burning strand without being dried up by the subterranean fire? Was
there below it, as there is under the sea, between it and the central
fires of the globe, a bed of granite? And would the volcano burst at
last?

“Sometimes the Count would give me a look of that sagacious and
keen-eyed curiosity by which one man searches another when he desires
an accomplice; then he shunned my eye as he saw it open a mouth, so to
speak, insisting on a reply, and seeming to say, ‘Speak first!’ Now and
then Comte Octave’s melancholy was surly and gruff. If these spurts of
temper offended me, he could get over it without thinking of asking my
pardon; but then his manners were gracious to the point of Christian
humility.

“When I became attached like a son to this man—to me such a mystery,
but so intelligible to the outer world, to whom the epithet eccentric is
enough to account for all the enigmas of the heart—I changed the state
of the house. Neglect of his own interests was carried by the Count
to the length of folly in the management of his affairs. Possessing an
income of about a hundred and sixty thousand francs, without including
the emoluments of his appointments—three of which did not come under
the law against plurality—he spent sixty thousand, of which at least
thirty thousand went to his servants. By the end of the first year I
had got rid of all these rascals, and begged His Excellency to use his
influence in helping me to get honest servants. By the end of the second
year the Count, better fed and better served, enjoyed the comforts of
modern life; he had fine horses, supplied by a coachman to whom I paid
so much a month for each horse; his dinners on his reception days,
furnished by Chevet at a price agreed upon, did him credit; his daily
meals were prepared by an excellent cook found by my uncle, and helped
by two kitchenmaids. The expenditure for housekeeping, not including
purchases, was no more than thirty thousand francs a year; we had two
additional men-servants, whose care restored the poetical aspect of the
house; for this old palace, splendid even in its rust, had an air of
dignity which neglect had dishonored.

“‘I am no longer astonished,’ said he, on hearing of these results, ‘at
the fortunes made by servants. In seven years I have had two cooks, who
have become rich restaurant-keepers.’

“Early in the year 1826 the Count had, no doubt, ceased to watch me, and
we were as closely attached as two men can be when one is subordinate to
the other. He had never spoken to me of my future prospects, but he had
taken an interest, both as a master and as a father, in training me. He
often required me to collect materials for his most arduous labors;
I drew up some of his reports, and he corrected them, showing the
difference between his interpretation of the law, his views and mine.
When at last I had produced a document which he could give in as his own
he was delighted; this satisfaction was my reward, and he could see that
I took it so. This little incident produced an extraordinary effect on a
soul which seemed so stern. The Count pronounced sentence on me, to
use a legal phrase, as supreme and royal judge; he took my head in his
hands, and kissed me on the forehead.

“‘Maurice,’ he exclaimed, ‘you are no longer my apprentice; I know not
yet what you will be to me—but if no change occurs in my life, perhaps
you will take the place of a son.’

“Comte Octave had introduced me to the best houses in Paris, whither I
went in his stead, with his servants and carriage, on the too frequent
occasions when, on the point of starting, he changed his mind, and sent
for a hackney cab to take him—Where?—that was the mystery. By the
welcome I met with I could judge of the Count’s feelings towards me, and
the earnestness of his recommendations. He supplied all my wants with
the thoughtfulness of a father, and with all the greater liberality
because my modesty left it to him always to think of me. Towards the
end of January 1827, at the house of the Comtesse de Serizy, I had such
persistent ill-luck at play that I lost two thousand francs, and I would
not draw them out of my savings. Next morning I asked myself, ‘Had I
better ask my uncle for the money, or put my confidence in the Count?’

“I decided on the second alternative.

“‘Yesterday,’ said I, when he was at breakfast, ‘I lost persistently at
play; I was provoked, and went on; I owe two thousand francs. Will you
allow me to draw the sum on account of my year’s salary?’

“‘No,’ said he, with the sweetest smile; ‘when a man plays in society,
he must have a gambling purse. Draw six thousand francs; pay your debts.
Henceforth we must go halves; for since you are my representative on
most occasions, your self-respect must not be made to suffer for it.’

“I made no speech of thanks. Thanks would have been superfluous between
us. And yet we had not yet unlimited confidence in each other; he did not
open to me the vast subterranean chambers which I had detected in his
secret life; and I, for my part, never said to him, ‘What ails you? From
what are you suffering?’

“What could he be doing during those long evenings? He would often come
in on foot or in a hackney cab when I returned in a carriage—I, his
secretary! Was so pious a man a prey to vices hidden under hypocrisy?
Did he expend all the powers of his mind to satisfy a jealousy more
dexterous than Othello’s? Did he live with some woman unworthy of him?
One morning, on returning from I have forgotten what shop, where I had
just paid a bill, between the Church of Saint-Paul and the Hotel de
Ville, I came across Comte Octave in such eager conversation with an old
woman that he did not see me. The appearance of this hag filled me with
strange suspicions, suspicions that were all the better founded because
I never found that the Count invested his savings. Is it not shocking to
think of? I was constituting myself my patron’s censor. At that time I
knew that he had more than six hundred thousand francs to invest; and
if he had bought securities of any kind, his confidence in me was so
complete in all that concerned his pecuniary interests, that I certainly
should have known it.

“Sometimes, in the morning, the Count took exercise in his garden, to
and fro, like a man to whom a walk is the hippogryph ridden by dreamy
melancholy. He walked and walked! And he rubbed his hands enough to
rub the skin off. And then, if I met him unexpectedly as he came to
the angle of a path, I saw his face beaming. His eyes, instead of
the hardness of a turquoise, had that velvety softness of the blue
periwinkle, which had so much struck me on the occasion of my first
visit, by reason of the astonishing contrast in the two different looks;
the look of a happy man, and the look of an unhappy man. Two or three
times at such a moment he had taken me by the arm and led me on; then
he had said, ‘What have you come to ask?’ instead of pouring out his
joy into my heart that opened to him. But more often, especially since
I could do his work for him and write his reports, the unhappy man would
sit for hours staring at the goldfish that swarmed in a handsome marble
basin in the middle of the garden, round which grew an amphitheatre
of the finest flowers. He, an accomplished statesman, seemed to have
succeeded in making a passion of the mechanical amusement of crumbling
bread to fishes.

“This is how the drama was disclosed of this second inner life, so
deeply ravaged and storm-tossed, where, in a circle overlooked by Dante
in his Inferno, horrible joys had their birth.”

The Consul-General paused.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“On a certain Monday,” he resumed, “M. le Président de Grandville and M. de Serizy (then Vice‑President of the Council of State) met at Comte Octave’s house. They formed a committee of three; I was the secretary. The Count had already secured my appointment as Auditor to the Council of State. All documents for their inquiry into the political matter privately submitted to them lay on a long table in the library. They had trusted the Count to examine the papers preliminarily. To avoid carrying all the papers to M. de Serizy as president, they decided to meet first in the Rue Payenne. The Cabinet at the Tuileries attached great importance to this work; its chief burden fell on me—and to it I owed my appointment that year as Master of Appeals.

“Though the Comtes de Grandville and de Serizy, whose habits resembled my patron’s, never dined away, we were still discussing the matter late when the servant told me, ‘MM. the Cures of Saint‑Paul and of the White Friars have been waiting in the drawing‑room for two hours.’

It was nine o’clock.

“‘Well, gentlemen, you find yourselves compelled to dine with priests,’ said Comte Octave. ‘I do not know whether Grandville can overcome his horror of a priest’s gown—’

“‘It depends on the priest.’

“‘One of them is my uncle, and the other is the Abbé Gaudron,’ said I. ‘Do not be alarmed; the Abbé Fontanon is no longer second priest at Saint‑Paul—’

“‘Well, let us dine,’ replied the Président de Grandville. ‘A bigot frightens me, but there is no one so cheerful as a truly pious man.’

We went into the drawing‑room. The dinner was delightful. Men of real information—politicians whose business gives consummate experience and practice of speech—are admirable storytellers. With them there is no medium: they are either heavy or sublime. A statesman's fun, faceted like a diamond, is sharp, sparkling, and full of sense. Confident the proprieties would be observed, my uncle let his wit play—refined, gentle, penetrating, elegant, like men used to concealing thoughts under a black robe. There was nothing vulgar nor idle in this light talk, which I compare, for its effect, to Rossini’s music.

The Abbé Gaudron was, as M. de Grandville said, more Saint Peter than Saint Paul: a peasant full of faith, square on his feet and tall; his ignorance of the world and literature enlivened conversation with guileless amazement and unexpected questions. They began discussing a plague‑spot of social life—adultery. My uncle noted the contradiction the legislators of the Code, still shaken by the Revolution, had set between civil and religious law, which he said was at the root of the mischief.

“‘In the eyes of the Church,’ said he, ‘adultery is a crime; in those of your tribunals it is a misdemeanor. Adultery drives to the police court in a carriage instead of standing at the bar to be tried. Napoleon’s Council of State, too tender toward erring women, was inefficient. Should they not have harmonized civil and religious law, and sent the guilty wife to a convent, as of old?’

“‘To a convent!’ said M. de Serizy. ‘They must first have created convents, and in those days monasteries were being turned into barracks. Besides, think of what you say, M. l’Abbé—give to God what society would have none of?’

“‘Oh!’ said the Comte de Grandville, ‘you do not know France. They were obliged to leave the husband free to take proceedings: well, there are not ten cases of adultery brought up in a year.’

“‘M. l’Abbé preaches for his own saint, for it was Jesus Christ who invented adultery,’ said Comte Octave. ‘In the East, the cradle of the human race, woman was merely a luxury, regarded as a chattel; no virtues were demanded of her but obedience and beauty. By exalting the soul above the body, the modern family in Europe—a daughter of Christ—invented indissoluble marriage, and made it a sacrament.’

“‘Ah! the Church saw the difficulties,’ exclaimed M. de Grandville.

“‘This institution has given rise to a new world,’ the Count went on with a smile. ‘But the practices of that world will never be those of a climate where women are marriageable at seven years of age, and more than old at five‑and‑twenty. The Catholic Church overlooked the needs of half the globe.—So let us discuss Europe only.

“‘Is woman our superior or our inferior? That is the real question so far as we are concerned. If woman is our inferior, by placing her on so high a level as the Church does, fearful punishments for adultery were needful. And formerly that was what was done. The cloister or death sums up early legislation. But since then practice has modified the law, as is always the case. The throne became a hotbed for adultery, and its increase marks the decline of Catholic dogma. Today, where the Church demands only sincere repentance, society marks rather than executes. The law still condemns but no longer terrifies. Thus two moral standards exist: the world and the Code. Where the Code is weak, as I admit with our dear Abbé, the world is audacious and satirical; few judges would not have committed the faults they thunder against. The world, which contradicts law in its rejoicings, habits, and pleasures, is severer than Code or Church: it punishes a blunder after encouraging hypocrisy. The whole marriage law needs reconstruction. French law would be perfect if it excluded daughters from inheriting.’

“‘We three among us know the question very thoroughly,’ said the Comte de Grandville with a laugh. ‘I have a wife I cannot live with. Serizy has a wife who will not live with him. As for you, Octave, yours ran away from you. So we three represent every case of the conjugal conscience, and, no doubt, if ever divorce is brought in again, we shall form the committee.’

Octave’s fork dropped on his glass, breaking it and his plate. He turned as pale as death and flashed a thunderous glare at M. de Grandville, hinting at my presence, which I caught.

“‘Forgive me, my dear fellow. I did not see Maurice,’ the Président went on. ‘Serizy and I, after being the witnesses to your marriage, became your accomplices; I did not think I was committing an indiscretion in the presence of these two venerable priests.’

M. de Serizy changed the subject, listing all he had done to please his wife without success. He concluded that human sympathies cannot be regulated; social law is best when nearest natural law. Nature disregards affinities of souls; her aim is propagation. Hence the Code was wise to leave latitude to chance. Preventing daughters from inheriting while male heirs existed was an excellent provision—whether to hinder degeneration, or to make households happier by abolishing scandalous unions and favoring moral qualities and beauty.

“‘But then,’ he exclaimed, lifting his hand with a gesture of disgust, ‘how are we to perfect legislation in a country which insists on bringing together seven or eight hundred legislators!—After all, if I am sacrificed,’ he added, ‘I have a child to succeed me.’

“‘Setting aside all the religious question,’ my uncle said, ‘I would remark to your Excellency that Nature only owes us life, and that it is society that owes us happiness. Are you a father?’ my uncle asked.

“‘And I—have I any children?’ said Comte Octave in a hollow voice, and his tone made such an impression that there was no more talk of wives or marriage.

After coffee, the two Counts and two priests slipped away, seeing poor Octave had fallen into melancholy and did not notice. My patron sat in an armchair by the fire, like a man crushed.

“‘You now know the secret of my life,’ he said when we were alone. ‘After three years of marriage, one evening I found a letter in which the Countess announced her flight. The letter had dignity; women preserve virtues even when committing that sin. The story now is that she went abroad on a ship that wrecked; she is supposed dead. I have lived alone seven years. Enough for this evening, Maurice. We will speak of my situation when I have grown used to speaking of it. Chronic disease needs time to accustom to improvement—which often seems another aspect of the complaint.’

I went to bed agitated; the mystery seemed more obscure. I foresaw some strange drama, for there could be no vulgar difference between the woman the Count could select and his character. The events driving the Countess from so noble, amiable, perfect, loving a man must have been singular. M. de Grandville’s remark was like a torch thrown into caverns I had long walked; though the flame dimly lit them, I perceived their extent. I could imagine the Count’s sufferings without knowing their depths. His sallow face, parched temples, overwhelming studies, moments of absentmindedness, the smallest details of this married bachelor’s life stood out in luminous relief during the hour of mental questioning—the twilight before sleep—into which I gave myself.

Oh, how I loved my poor master! He seemed sublime. I read a melancholy poem; I saw perpetual activity in a heart I had accused of torpor. Must not supreme grief at last stagnate? Had this judge, with so much power, ever revenged himself? Was he feeding on her long agony? Is it not remarkable in Paris to keep anger seething for ten years? What had Octave done since this misfortune—the separation of husband and wife is a great misfortune in our day, when domestic life has become a social question unlike before?

We allowed days to pass on watch, for great sorrows have a diffidence of their own; but at last, one evening the Count said in a grave voice:

“‘Stay.’
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“This, as nearly as may be, is his story.

“‘My father had a ward, rich and lovely, who was sixteen when I came
back from college to live in this old house. Honorine, brought up by my
mother, was just awakening to life. Full of grace and childish ways, she
dreamed of happiness as one dreams of jewels; perhaps happiness was to
her the jewel of the soul. Her piety had a puerile side; religion itself
was poetry to her ingenuous heart. She looked to the future as a
perpetual fête. Innocent and pure, no delirium had disturbed her dream.
Shame and grief had never tinged her cheek. She did not even inquire
into the cause of her involuntary emotions on a fine spring day. She
felt weak and destined to obedience, and awaited marriage without
wishing for it. Her smiling imagination knew nothing of the corruption
which literature depicts; she was ignorant of the world and its
dangers. The dear child had suffered so little that she had not
developed courage. Her guilelessness would have led her to walk among
serpents like the ideal Innocence painters invent. We lived together
like two brothers.

“‘After a year, by the basin in the garden, throwing crumbs to the fish,
I asked her, “Would you like us to be married? With me you could do
whatever you please, while another man would make you unhappy.”

“‘“Mamma,” she said to my mother, “Octave and I have agreed to be
married----”

“‘“What! at seventeen?” my mother protested. “No, you must wait eighteen
months; if eighteen months hence you like each other, well, your birth
and fortunes are equal; you can have a suitable marriage and a love
match.”’

“‘When I was six-and-twenty and Honorine nineteen, we were married.
Respect for my parents—old folks of the Bourbon Court—kept us from
making the house fashionable; we lived as children. I went into society;
I initiated my wife into fashion; I regarded it as my duty to instruct
her.

“‘I recognized afterwards that marriages under such conditions carry a
rock against which many affections are wrecked. The husband becomes a
pedagogue and love perishes beneath the rod that sooner or later gives
pain; a young, handsome wife, discreet and laughter-loving, will not
accept any superiority beyond her natural grace. Perhaps I was wrong.
During the difficult beginnings of a household I perhaps assumed a
magisterial tone; or I trusted too entirely to that artless nature. I
kept no watch over the Countess, in whom revolt seemed impossible.
Alas! neither in politics nor domestic life has it been settled whether
empires and happiness are wrecked by too much confidence or too much
severity. Perhaps I failed to perceive Honorine’s girlish dreams? Who
can tell while happy days last what precepts he has neglected?’

“I remember only the broad outlines of his self-reproaches, made in the
good faith of an anatomist seeking a cause missed by his brethren; his
indulgence struck me as worthy of Jesus rescuing the woman taken in
adultery.

“‘It was eighteen months after my father’s death—my mother followed in a
few months—when the fearful night came which surprised me with
Honorine’s farewell letter. What poetic delusion had seduced my wife?
Was it sensual? Misfortune’s magnetism? Genius? I could not know. The
blow was so terrible that for a month I remained stunned. Afterwards
reflection counselled me to continue in ignorance; Honorine’s misfortunes
have since taught me too much.--So far, Maurice, the story is
commonplace enough; but one word will change it all: I love Honorine; I
have never ceased to worship her. From the day she left me I have lived
on memory; one by one I recall the pleasures for which Honorine no doubt
had no taste.

“‘Oh!’ he cried, seeing my amazement, ‘do not make a hero of me; do not
think me such a fool as the Colonel would say, as to have sought no
diversion. Alas, my boy! I was either too young or too much in love;
I have not in the whole world met another woman. After frightful
struggles I tried to forget; money in hand, I stood on the threshold of
infidelity, but the memory of Honorine rose before me like a white
statue. I recalled the infinite delicacy of that exquisite skin, the
ingenous face, the heavenly fragrance, the light in her eyes, the
prettiness of her movements, and I fled as one would from violating a
tomb. At consultations, in Court, by night, I dream incessantly of
Honorine; only by excessive strength of mind do I attend to business.
This is the secret of my labors.

“‘I felt no more anger with her than a father feels seeing his child in
danger. I understood I had made a poem of my wife, a poem I delighted in
so intoxicatedly that I fancied she shared the intoxication. Ah!
Maurice, indiscriminating passion in a husband is a mistake that may
lead to any crime in a wife. I had left all the faculties of this child,
loved as a child, unemployed; I had perhaps wearied her with my love
before the hour of loving had struck for her. Too young to see that in
the constancy of the wife lies the germ of the mother’s devotion, she
mistook this first test of marriage for life itself, and the refractory
child cursed life, unknown to me, out of modesty perhaps. In that
cruel position she was defenceless against any man who stirred her
deeply. I, so wise a judge, who have a kind heart but whose mind was
absorbed, understood too late these unwritten laws of the woman’s code:
I read them by the light of the fire that wrecked my roof. Then I
constituted my heart a tribunal; by the law the husband is judge: I
acquitted my wife and condemned myself. Love seized me as a mean,
despotic passion which comes over some old men. To this day I love the
absent Honorine as a man of sixty loves a woman he must possess, and yet
I have the strength of a young man. I have the insolence of the old man
and the reserve of a boy. Society laughs at such a desperate conjugal
predicament. Where it pities a lover, it ridicules a husband who cannot
keep his wife under the canopy of the Church and the Maire’s scarf. I
had to keep silence.

“‘Serizy is happy. His indulgence allows him to see his wife; he can
protect and defend her; as he adores her, he knows all the joys of a
benefactor. “I remain married only for my wife’s sake,” he told me.

“‘But I—I have nothing; I have not even to face ridicule, I who live
solely on a love which is starving! I who can never find a word to say
to a woman of the world! I who loathe prostitution! I who am faithful
under a spell! But for my religious faith, I should have killed
myself. I have thrown myself into hard work as into a gulf, and come out
alive, fevered, sleepless!----’

“I cannot repeat all his words; passion gave him an eloquence above the
pleader’s, and I, like him, felt my cheeks wet with tears. After a
pause, he finished with this revelation:—

“‘This is the drama of my soul, but it is not the living drama acted in
Paris. The interior drama interests nobody. I know it; one day you will
admit it. No one can burden his heart with another’s pain; the measure of
suffering is in ourselves. You can imagine me calming despair by
contemplating a miniature in which I see and kiss her brow and lips,
breathe the whiteness of her skin; or leaping with hope and then writhing
under despair, trampling Paris to quell irritation by fatigue. My life
is a continual paroxysm of fear, joy, and dejection.

“‘As to the drama—it is this. You think I am occupied with Council of
State, Chamber, Courts, politics. Seven hours at night suffice for all
that; my faculties are over-wrought. Honorine is my real concern. To
recover my wife is my only study: to guard her in her cage without her
suspecting she is in my power; to satisfy her needs, supply the little
pleasures she allows herself, to be about her like a sylph without letting
her know, for if she knew the future would be lost—that is my life. For
seven years I have never gone to bed without seeing the light of her
night-lamp, or her shadow on the curtains.

“‘She left my house taking nothing but the dress she wore that day. The
child carried magnanimity to folly. Eighteen months after her flight her
lover deserted her, appalled by the cold, cruel aspect of poverty—the
coward! The man doubtless had counted on the easy life abroad. Honorine
had sixty thousand francs a year of her own. The wretch left the dear
creature expecting an infant and without a penny. In November 1820 I
found means to get the best accoucheur to pose as a humble suburban
apothecary. I induced the parish priest to supply her needs as charity.
To hide my wife, secure her against discovery, find a devoted housekeeper
to be my confidante—this was a task worthy of Figaro! You may suppose
that to find where my wife had taken refuge I only had to make up my
mind.

“‘After three months of desperation rather than despair, I resolved to
devote myself to Honorine with God only in my secret. Love must have its
daily food. Ought I not to protect this child, whose guilt flowed from
my imprudence, against fresh disaster—to fulfil my part as guardian
angel? At seven months the infant died, happily for her and me. For nine
months more my wife lay between life and death, deserted when she most
needed a manly arm; but this arm,’ he said, holding out his, ‘was
extended over her head. Honorine was nursed as she would have been at
home. When, on recovery, she asked by whom she had been assisted, she
was told “By the Sisters of Charity, by the Maternity Society, by the
parish priest.”

“‘This woman, whose pride is almost a vice, has shown resistance in
misfortune, which on some evenings I call obstinacy. Honorine was bent on
earning her living. For five years I have lodged her in the Rue
Saint-Maur in a charming little house where she makes artificial flowers
and articles of fashion. She believes she sells them to a shop, paid so
well that she makes twenty francs a day; in six years she suspected
nothing. She pays about a third of true cost, so on six thousand francs
a year she lives as if she had fifteen thousand. She is devoted to
flowers, and pays a gardener a hundred crowns, who costs me twelve
hundred in wages, and sends me a bill for two thousand francs every
three months. I have promised him a market-garden on land I hold in the
name of a clerk. The smallest indiscretion would ruin him. Honorine has
a little house, a garden, and a splendid hothouse for five hundred
francs a year. There she lives under the name of her housekeeper,
Madame Gobain, an old woman of discretion I found, whose affection
Honorine has won. But their zeal is kept hot by the promise of reward.
The porter and his wife cost me dreadfully dear for the same reasons.
However, for three years Honorine has been happy, believing she owes her
comfort to her own toil.

“‘Yes,’ he cried, reading the question in my eyes, ‘I have made the
attempt. My wife had been in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. One day, when I
thought of reconciliation, I wrote a letter, re-written twenty times!
I went from the Rue Payenne to the Rue de Reuilly like a condemned man.
It was dark and foggy; I met Madame Gobain who was to tell me of my
wife. Honorine, on recognizing my writing, had thrown the letter into
the fire without reading it. What a dagger-stroke to a man who delights
in the trickery by which he gets fine Lyons velvet cheaply, a pheasant,
a fish, fruit, for a tenth of their value, for a woman ignorant enough
to think two hundred and fifty francs ample wages for a cook fit for a
bishop.

“‘You have sometimes found me rubbing my hands in a kind of happiness.
Well, I had just succeeded in some ruse worthy of the stage—I had sent
her an Indian shawl by a purchaser as the property of an actress who had
hardly worn it. My life can be summed up in two words: I love and I
wait! I have in Madame Gobain a faithful spy on the heart I worship. I
go every evening to chat with the old woman to hear all Honorine has
done; a single exclamation might betray the secrets of that soul which
is wilfully deaf and dumb. Honorine is pious; she attends church and
prays, but she has never been to confession or taken Communion; she
foresees what a priest would tell her. She will not listen to advice or
an injunction to return to me. This horror of me overwhelms me; I have
never done her the smallest harm. I have been kind. Granting I may have
been hasty in teaching her, that my man’s irony may have hurt her
girlish pride, is that reason for persisting in a determination only
implacable hatred could inspire? Honorine has never told Madame Gobain
who she is; she keeps absolute silence as to her marriage, so the worthy
woman can never speak a word in my favor. The others know nothing; they
live in awe of the Prefect of Police and their respect for a Minister’s
power. Hence it is impossible for me to penetrate that heart; the
citadel is mine, but I cannot get in. An act of violence would ruin me
for ever.

“‘How can I argue against reasons I do not know? Should I write a letter
and have it copied and laid before Honorine? That would risk a third
removal. The last cost me fifty thousand francs. The purchase was made in
the name of the secretary whom you succeeded. The unhappy man, who did
not know how lightly I sleep, was detected by me opening a box with the
private agreement; I coughed, and he panicked; next day I compelled him
to sell the house to the man in whose name it now stands, and I turned
him out.

“‘If it were not that I feel my noblest faculties satisfied—if my part
were not that of divine fatherhood; if I did not drink in delight by
every pore—there are moments when I should believe I was a monomaniac.
Sometimes at night I hear the jingling bells of madness. I dread the
violent transitions from faint hope to complete despair. A few days since
I was considering the horrible end of Lovelace and Clarissa Harlowe, and
saying to myself, if Honorine were the mother of a child of mine, must
she not necessarily return under her husband’s roof?

“‘I have such faith in a happy future that ten months ago I bought and
paid for one of the handsomest houses in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. If I
win her back I will not allow her to see that house again nor the room
from which she fled. I mean to place my idol in a new temple. That
house is being made a marvel of taste. I have been told of a poet who,
mad with love for an actress, bought the handsomest bed without knowing
how she would reward him. Well, one of the coldest of lawyers was
stirred to the depths by that anecdote. The orator of the Legislative
Chamber can understand the poet who feeds his ideal on material
possibilities. I love as a poet—as an emperor!’

“As I heard the last words, I believed Count Octave’s fears were
realized; he rose and walked, gesticulating, then stopped as if shocked
by his own vehemence. ‘I am very ridiculous,’ he added after a long
pause, looking at me as if craving pity.

“‘No, monsieur, you are very unhappy.’

“‘Ah yes!’ he went on. ‘From my speech you must believe in the intensity
of a physical passion which for nine years has absorbed me; but that is
nothing compared with the worship I feel for the soul, mind, and heart
in that woman. By retrospection I now see the graces of Honorine’s mind
and heart, which I paid little heed to while happy. Day by day I
appreciate the extent of my loss, discovering the exquisite gifts of
that capricious and refractory young creature who has grown so strong
and proud under poverty and the shock of cowardly desertion. And that
heavenly blossom is fading in solitude and hiding! The law we spoke of,’
he went on with bitter irony, ‘is a squad of gendarmes—my wife seized
and dragged away by force! Would that be to triumph over a corpse?
Religion has no hold on her; she craves its poetry and prays, but she
does not listen to the Church’s commandments. I have exhausted mercy,
kindness, love; I am at my wits’ end. Only one chance of victory is
left—the cunning and patience with which bird-catchers at last entrap the
wariest birds. Hence, Maurice, when M. de Grandville’s indiscretion
betrayed to you the secret of my life, I regarded that incident as a
decree of fate. Have you enough affection for me to show me romantic
devotion?’

“‘I see what you are coming to, Monsieur le Comte,’ said I; ‘I guess your
purpose. Your first secretary tried to open your deed box. I know the
heart of your second—he might fall in love with your wife. Can you
devote him to destruction by sending him into the fire? Can any one put
his hand into a brazier without burning it?’

“‘You are a foolish boy,’ replied the Count. ‘I will send you well
gloved. It is no secretary of mine that will be lodged in the Rue
Saint-Maur in the little garden-house I have at his disposal. It is my
distant cousin, Baron de l’Hostal, a lawyer high in office...’

“After a moment the gate bell rang, and a carriage came in. The footman
announced Madame de Courteville and her daughter. The Count’s cousin,
the widow of a judge, had a daughter and no fortune. What could a woman
of nine-and-twenty be in comparison with a young girl of twenty as lovely
as an ideal mistress?

“‘Baron, Master of Appeals till you get something better, and this old
house settled on her—would you not have enough reasons for not falling
in love with the Countess?’ he whispered, taking my hand and introducing
me to Madame de Courteville and her daughter.

“I was dazzled, not so much by these advantages as by Amélie de
Courteville’s beauty and her costuming designed to secure a marriage.

“But I will not talk of myself,” the Consul resumed.

“Three weeks later I went to live in the gardener’s cottage, cleaned,
repaired, and furnished with the celerity explained by three words:
Paris; French workmen; money! I was as much in love as the Count could
desire as a security. Would prudence in a young man of five-and-twenty
be equal to the part I undertook, involving a friend’s happiness? I
confess I counted on my uncle’s advice, for I had been authorized by the
Count to take him into confidence if I deemed it necessary. I engaged a
garden; I devoted myself to horticulture; I worked frantically, turning
up the soil, appropriating the ground to flowers. Like maniacs of Holland
or England, I gave out I was devoted to one flower and especially grew
dahlias. You will understand that my conduct, even in small details,
was laid down by the Count, whose intellect was directed to the trifling
incidents of the tragi-comedy in Rue Saint-Maur. As soon as the Countess
had gone to bed, at about eleven, Octave, Madame Gobain, and I sat in
council. I heard the old woman’s report: everything the Countess had
done. He inquired into her meals, occupations, frame of mind, the
flowers she aimed to imitate. I understood what love in despair may be
when it is the threefold passion of heart, mind, and senses. Octave
lived only for that hour.

“During two months, while my garden work lasted, I never set eyes on the
little house where my fair neighbor dwelt. I had not inquired whether I
had a neighbor, though the Countess’ garden was divided from mine by a
paling, along which she had planted cypress trees already four feet
high. One morning Madame Gobain announced as disastrous news the
intention, expressed by an eccentric neighbor, to build a wall between
the gardens at the end of the year. I will say nothing of the curiosity
which consumed me to see the Countess! The wish almost extinguished my
budding love for Amélie. A wall would cut away three-quarters of the
hatchet-shaped plot and leave Honorine’s garden a narrow alley.

“The Countess was in despair.

“‘My good Gobain,’ she said, ‘what sort of man is this florist?’

“‘I do not know whether it is possible to tame him. He seems to have a
horror of women. He is the nephew of a Paris curé. I have seen the uncle
once; a fine old man of sixty, very ugly but amiable. It is possible
the priest encourages his nephew’s love of flowers, as they say in the
neighborhood, that nothing worse may happen----’

“‘Well?’ asked the Countess.

“‘He is a little cracked,’ said Gobain, tapping her head.

“A harmless lunatic is the only man no woman distrusts in matters of
sentiment. You will see how wise the Count had been in choosing this
disguise for me.

“‘What ails him then?’ asked the Countess.

“‘He has studied too hard,’ replied Gobain; ‘he has turned
misanthropic. If you want to know all that is said about him----’

“‘Madmen frighten me less than sane folks; I will speak to him myself!
Tell him I beg him to come here. If I do not succeed, I will send for
the curé.’

“The day after, as I walked my graveled path, I caught sight of the
half-open curtains on the Countess’ first-floor window and a woman’s face
peeping out. Gobain called me. I glanced at the Countess’ house and, by
a rude shrug, expressed, ‘What do I care for your mistress?’

“‘Madame,’ said Gobain, ‘the madman bid me leave him in peace, saying
that even a charcoal seller is master in his own premises, especially
when he has no wife.’

“‘He is right,’ said the Countess.

“‘Yes, but he ended by saying, “I will go,” when I told him he would
distress a lady living in retirement who found her solace in growing
flowers.’

“The next day a signal from Gobain informed me that I was expected.
After the Countess’ breakfast, when she walked before her house, I broke
out some palings and went towards her. I had dressed as a countryman in
old gray flannel trousers, heavy wooden shoes, shabby shooting coat, a
peaked cap, a ragged bandana, hands soiled with mould, and a dibble in
my hand.

“‘Madame,’ said the housekeeper, ‘this good man is your neighbor.’

“The Countess was not alarmed. I saw at last the woman whose conduct
and her husband’s confidences had made me so curious. It was early May.
The air was pure, the spring verdure and fragrance a fitting setting for
this creature of sorrow. As I saw Honorine I understood Octave’s
passion.

“Her pallor struck me by its peculiar tone of white—for there are as
many tones of white as of red. Her skin showed the blood in blue veins;
at the slightest emotion a rosy flush came. The sunshine through the
acacias shed on Honorine a pale gold like that Raphael and Titian
enwrap their Virgins in. Her brown eyes expressed tenderness and
vivacity; their brightness seemed reflected through long lashes. By
lifting her eyelids she could spellbind; there was feeling, dignity,
terror, or contempt in her way of raising or dropping those veils of
the soul. She could freeze or give life by a look. Her light-brown hair,
carelessly knotted, outlined a poet’s brow, high, powerful, dreamy. The
mouth was voluptuous. All the lines and forms of the head had a stamp of
nobleness defying time.

“Though slight, Honorine was not thin; her figure might revive love when
it believed itself exhausted. She perfectly represented the word
mignonne—pliant like a kitten. Her small feet made a light inherent
sound that harmonized with the rustle of her dress, producing a feminine
music stamped on the heart. Her gait bore the quarterings of her race
with pride, so even a working man would make way in the street. Gay and
tender, haughty and imposing, she remained a child. But a child who
might be as strong as an angel; once hurt, she would be implacable.

“Coldness on that face must be death to those she had smiled on. Inhaling
the perfume of violets about her, I understood how the memory of this
wife arrested the Count on the threshold of debauchery, and how
impossible to forget a creature who was a flower to the touch, the eye,
and the soul. Honorine inspired chivalrous devotion irrespective of
reward. A man seeing her must say to himself: ‘Think, and I will divine
your thought; speak, and I will obey. If my life sacrificed in torments
can procure you one day’s happiness, take my life; I will smile like a
martyr.’

“Many women study expression and succeed in producing similar effects;
in her it was all outcome of delightful nature. If I tell you this, it
is because her soul, thoughts, and heart’s exquisiteness are what we
are concerned with, and you would blame me if I had not sketched them.

“I was near forgetting my part as a half-crazy lout, clumsy and hardly
chivalrous.

“‘I am told, madame, that you are fond of flowers?’

“‘I am an artificial flower-maker,’ she said. ‘After growing flowers I
imitate them, like a mother painting her children. That is enough to say
I am poor and unable to pay for the concession I desire from you.’

“‘But how,’ said I, grave as a judge, ‘can a lady of such rank ply so
humble a calling? Have you, like me, good reasons for employing your
hands so as to keep your brain from working?’

“‘Let us stick to the question of the wall,’ she said with a smile.

“‘We have begun at the foundations,’ I replied. ‘Must I not know which of
us ought to yield to the other in behalf of our suffering, or, if you
choose, our mania? Oh! what a charming clump of narcissus!’

“She had made a perfect museum of flowers and shrubs, arranged as an
artist. The retired garden breathed comforting scents and suggested
sweet thoughts and graceful pictures. It showed the sign-manual of our
true character stamped on all when nothing compels hypocrisy. I looked
at the narcissus and at the Countess, pretending to be more in love with
the flowers than with her to keep up my part.

“‘So you are fond of flowers?’ she asked.

“‘They are the only beings that never disappoint our care and affection.’
I delivered a diatribe comparing botany and the world, ending miles from
the dividing wall. The Countess naturally brought me back to the point;
women not in love have the cold blood of an experienced attorney.

“‘If you insist on my leaving the paling,’ I said, ‘you will learn all
the secrets of gardening I want to hide; I am seeking a blue dahlia, a
blue rose; I am crazy for blue flowers. Is not blue the favorite color
of superior souls? We are neither of us at home; we might as well make a
door of open railings to unite our gardens. You too are fond of flowers;
you will see mine, I shall see yours. If you receive no visitors, I
have none but my uncle, the Curé of the White Friars.’

“‘No,’ she said, ‘I will give you the right to come into my garden at any
hour. You will always be admitted as a neighbor with whom I hope to keep
good terms. But I like my solitude too well to burden it with loss of
independence.’

“‘As you please,’ said I, and leaped the paling.

“‘Now, of what use would a door be?’ I cried from my domain, mocking
her with a madman’s grimace.

“For a fortnight I seemed not to notice my neighbor. Towards the end of
May, one lovely evening we were both walking opposite sides of the
paling and exchanged civil words. Finding me in deep dejection she
spoke to me of hope in short, nurse-like sentences. I leaped the fence
and found myself at her side. The Countess led me into the house, wishing
to subdue my sadness. So I penetrated the sanctuary where everything
harmonized with the woman I had tried to describe.

“Exquisite simplicity reigned. The interior was a dainty box of
eighteenth-century art: the dining-room frescoed with garlands, staircase
in monochrome, a faded drawing-room hung with tapestry panels, a bath,
and upstairs a single bedroom with dressing-room and a library she used
as a workroom. The kitchen was in the basement. The balcony’s garlands
hid the roof; only lead cornices were visible. In this retreat one was a
hundred leagues from Paris.

“But for a bitter smile that occasionally played on those red lips, one
might have believed the violet hidden in her thicket of flowers happy.
In a few days we reached intimacy from close neighborhood and the
Countess’ conviction I was indifferent to women. A look would have spoilt
all, and I never allowed thought of her to appear in my eyes. Honorine
regarded me as an old friend; her manner was pity. Her looks, voice,
and words showed she was far from coquetry. She soon gave me the right
to enter the pretty workshop where she made flowers, a retreat full of
books and curiosities, as smart as a boudoir where elegance emphasized
the vulgarity of her tools. She had poetized a manufacture.

“Perhaps of all the work a woman can do, making artificial flowers lets
her display the most grace. Coloring prints requires stooping; embroidery
brings consumption or curvature; engraving music is laborious; sewing
earns little. But making flowers and light articles needs a variety of
movements and ideas that keep a pretty woman in her sphere; she may chat,
laugh, sing, or think.

“There was feeling for art in how she arranged the myriad-colored petals
on her long table. The saucers of color were clean and orderly; a little
cabinet held tiny moulds; a fine Japanese bowl the paste; wire lay in a
drawer. A Venetian glass held the living model. She had a passion for
achievement, attempting difficult racemes and corollas. Her hands were
swift as her thoughts; her fingers seemed fairy-like in the twisting,
fitting, and pressure required. She adapted each motion with the lucidity
of instinct.

“I could not tire of admiring her shaping a flower, padding the wire,
adjusting leaves. She displayed the genius of a painter, copying faded
flowers and yellowing leaves, struggling even with wildflowers, artless
yet elaborate.

“‘This art,’ she said, ‘is in its infancy. If Parisian women had some of
the genius the harem slavery draws out in Oriental women, they would
lend a complete language of flowers to their wreaths. To please my
taste I have made drooping flowers with leaves of Florentine bronze for
a young woman whose life is a failure—poetical fitness. How many things
a woman might express by her headdress! Are there not flowers for
drunken Bacchantes, flowers for stern bigots, pensive flowers for bored
women? Botany may express every sensation and thought, even the most
subtle.’

“She employed me to stamp leaves, cut material, and prepare wires. My
affected desire for occupation made me skilful. We talked as we worked;
when idle I read new books to her, keeping up my part as a man weary of
life, gloomy and misanthropic. My person led to banter as to my physical
resemblance—save his club-foot—to Lord Byron. It was tacitly admitted
that her troubles outweighed mine, though my causes for misanthropy
might have satisfied Job.

“I will not speak of the shame which tormented me as I inflicted false
wounds on my heart to excite her compassion. I soon appreciated my
devotedness by estimating the baseness of a spy. Her sympathy would have
comforted any great grief. This charming creature, weaned from the world
and alone for years, offered kindnesses with childlike effusiveness and
such compassion as would fill with bitterness any profligate who fell
in love with her; for alas, it was all charity and pity. Her renunciation
of love and dread of what is called happiness, she proclaimed with equal
vehemence. These days proved to me that a woman’s friendship is far
superior to her love.

“I suffered my revelations being dragged from me with grimaces as a
young lady allows before sitting at the piano. The Countess strengthened
our intimacy; she found in me a counterpart of her antipathy to love,
and I fancied she was content with being a Man Friday on her desert
island. Solitude perhaps weighed on her. There was nothing coquette; she
told me she had no heart except in the ideal world. I compared these two
lives: his, activity and agitation; hers, inaction and quiescence. My
misanthropy let me utter cynical sallies against men and women, hoping
to bring her to confidence; she was not to be caught, and I began to
understand the mulish obstinacy commoner among women than assumed.

“‘The Orientals are right,’ I said one evening, ‘when they shut you up
and regard you as playthings. Europe has been punished for admitting you
to society and accepting you on an equal footing. Woman is the most
dishonorable and cowardly being, and that is where her charm lies. Where
would be pleasure in hunting a tame thing? Once a woman inspires a man’s
passion, she is for him forever sacred. Men’s gratitude for past delights
is eternal, though the woman may forget. You all have a feeling a
popular calumny ascribes to the Lady of Nesle: “What a pity we cannot
live on love as on fruit, and that when we have had our fill, nothing
survives but remembrance!”’

“‘God has, no doubt, reserved such perfect bliss for Paradise,’ she
said. ‘But if your argument is witty, it is false. What can those women
be who give themselves up to a succession of loves?’ she asked, looking
at me like the Virgin in Ingres’ picture.

“‘You are an actress in good faith,’ I said. ‘Still, lovely as you are,
you have loved; ergo, you forget.’

“‘I!’ she cried, evading. ‘I am not a woman. I am a nun, and seventy-two
years old!’

“‘Then how can you assert you feel more keenly than I? Sorrow has one
form for women; the only misfortunes they regard are disappointments of
the heart.’

“She looked at me sweetly and, like many women caught between truth’s
issues, persisted in her wilfulness.

“‘I am a nun,’ she said, ‘and you talk to me of a world where I shall
never again set foot.’

“‘Not even in thought?’ I asked.

“‘Is the world so desirable?’ she replied. ‘Oh! my mind wanders higher.
The angel of perfection, the beautiful Gabriel, often sings in my heart.
If I were rich I should work to stop myself soaring on many-tinted
wings. There are meditations which ruin us women. I owe much peace of
mind to my flowers, though sometimes they fail. On some days an idea
possesses me that some great event is impending and life will change; I
stare into darkness, dislike my work, and after many fatigues find
everyday life again. Is this a warning from heaven? I ask myself----’

“After three months of this struggle between two diplomats—youthful
melancholy and a woman whose disgust of life made her invulnerable—I
told the Count it was impossible to drag this tortoise out of her
shell; it must be broken. The evening before, in our last friendly
discussion, the Countess had exclaimed: ‘Lucretia’s dagger wrote in
letters of blood the watchword of woman’s charter: Liberty!’

“From that moment the Count left me free to act.

“‘I have been paid a hundred francs for the flowers and caps I made this
week!’ Honorine exclaimed gleefully one Saturday evening when I visited
her in the ground-floor sitting-room which the unavowed proprietor had
had regilt.

“It was ten o’clock. July twilight and a glorious moon lent a misty
light. Gusts of perfume soothed the soul; the Countess clinked five gold
pieces given to her by a supposititious dealer in frippery, another of
Octave’s accomplices, M. Popinot.

“‘I earn my living by amusing myself,’ she said; ‘I am free, when men
armed with laws have tried to make us slaves. I have transports of pride
every Saturday! I like M. Gaudissart’s gold pieces as much as Lord Byron
liked Mr. Murray’s.’

“‘This is not becoming in a woman,’ I said.

“‘Pooh! Am I a woman? I am a boy with a soft soul; a boy whom no woman
can torture----’

“‘Your life is the negation of your being,’ said I. ‘What? you, on whom
God lavished His choicest treasures, do you never wish—’

“‘For what?’ she asked, disturbed by a speech that for the first time
had contradicted my assumed part.

“‘For a pretty little child, with curling hair, running among the
flowers, calling you mother!’

“A prolonged silence revealed the effect of my words. Leaning on her
sofa, the Countess did not faint but froze under a nervous attack she
afterwards compared to an insidious poison. I called Madame Gobain, who
laid her mistress on the bed, unlaced and undressed her, restoring not
life but consciousness of dreadful suffering. I walked the path behind
the house weeping and doubting. I wished to give up this bird-catcher’s
part I had rashly assumed. Madame Gobain came down and found me with my
face wet with tears, then hurried up to say:

“‘Monsieur Maurice is crying like a child.’

“Roused by the evil interpretation our mutual behavior might attract,
the Countess summoned strength to put on a wrapper and come down to me.

“‘You are not the cause of this attack,’ she said. ‘I am subject to
these spasms, a sort of cramp of the heart----’

“‘And will you not tell me of your troubles?’ I asked, wiping my tears.
‘Have you not told me you were a mother and unhappy at losing your
child?’

“‘Marie!’ she called. Gobain came in.

“‘Bring lights and some tea,’ she ordered, with the calm decision of a
Mylady in armor of pride.

“When the housekeeper had lighted tapers and closed shutters, the
Countess showed a mute countenance; pride and gravity reasserted
themselves. She said:

“‘Do you know why I like Lord Byron so much? It is because he suffered
as animals do. Of what use are complaints when they are not elegy, mockery
like Don Juan, or reverie like Childe Harold? Nothing shall be known of
me. My heart is a poem I lay before God.’

“‘If I chose----’ I began.

“‘If?’ she repeated.

“‘I have no interest in anything,’ I replied, ‘so I cannot be
inquisitive; but if I chose, I could know all your secrets by to-morrow.’

“‘I defy you!’ she exclaimed with ill-disguised uneasiness.

“‘Seriously?’

“‘Certainly,’ she said, tossing her head. ‘If such a crime is possible I
ought to know it.’

“‘First, madame,’ I went on, pointing to her hands, ‘those pretty
fingers show they were not made for toil. Then you call yourself Madame
Gobain, yet you said to Marie: “Here, this is for you?” Marie is the real
Madame Gobain; you conceal your name behind your housekeeper’s. Fear
nothing from me. You have in me the most devoted friend you will ever
have: a friend I give the sacred and pathetic meaning to—the friend who
will defend you against everything, and only wishes you to be as happy
as such a woman ought to be. Who can tell whether the pain I caused was
not voluntary?’

“‘Yes,’ she replied with threatening audacity, ‘I insist on it. Be
curious and tell me all you can find out about me; but,’ and she held up
her finger, ‘you must also tell by what means you obtain your
information. The preservation of the small happiness I enjoy here
depends on the steps you take.’

“‘That means you will fly----’

“‘On wings!’ she cried, ‘to the New World----’

“‘Where you will be at the mercy of brutal passions you would inspire,’
I interrupted. ‘Is it not the essence of genius and beauty to shine and
excite desires? Paris is a desert with Bedouins; it is the only place to
hide among those who work for a livelihood. What have you to complain
of? Who am I? An additional servant—M. Gobain, that is all. If you
have to fight a duel you may need a second.’

“‘Never mind; find out who I am. I have already said I insist. Now I
beg that you will,’ she added with the grace all ladies can command.

“‘Well then, to-morrow, at the same hour, I will tell you what I may
have discovered,’ I replied. ‘But do not therefore hate me! Will you
behave like other women?’

“‘What do other women do?’

“‘They lay upon us immense sacrifices, and when we have made them they
reproach us later as if for an injury.’

“‘They are right if the thing required appears to be a sacrifice!’ she
replied pointedly.

“‘Instead of sacrifices say efforts and—’

“‘It would be an impertinence,’ she said.

“‘Forgive me,’ I replied. ‘I forget that woman and the Pope are
infallible.’

“‘Good heavens!’ she said after a long pause, ‘only two words would be
enough to destroy the peace so dearly bought, which I enjoy like a
fraud----’

“She rose. ‘Where can I go? What is to become of me? Must I leave this
quiet retreat that I arranged to end my days in?’

“‘To end your days!’ I exclaimed. ‘Has it never struck you that a time
would come when you could no longer work, when competition will lower the
price of flowers and articles of fashion—?’

“‘I have already saved a thousand crowns,’ she said.

“‘Heavens! what privations such a sum must represent!’ I cried.

“‘Leave me,’ she said, ‘till to-morrow. This evening I am not myself; I
must be alone. Must I not save my strength in case of disaster? If you
should learn anything, others would be informed, and then—Good-night,’
she added shortly, dismissing me with an imperious gesture.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
“The battle is tomorrow,” I repeated with a smile to keep up my air of indifference. As I walked down the avenue those words ran through my mind.

Octave’s anxiety matched Honorine’s. The Count and I stayed together until two in the morning, pacing by the Bastille trenches like generals on the eve of a fight, measuring chances and searching for a decisive moment. These two beings, split inwardly, would each lie awake—one hoping, the other dreading reunion. True drama is in feeling, in the Spiritual World. Octave and Honorine lived there.

I was punctual. At ten I was shown into a charming white-and-blue bedroom—the nest of this wounded dove. The Countess looked at me and, struck dumb by my respectful demeanour, was about to speak.

“Madame la Comtesse,” I said gravely. She sank into her chair, grief stamped on her face in a pose I could have wished painted.

“You are the wife of a noble, respected man; great in the world and greater in his conduct to you. You and he are lofty natures. Where do you suppose you live?”

“In my own house,” she answered, astonished.

“In Count Octave’s,” I said. “You have been deceived. M. Lenormand, the usher, is only a screen for your husband. The seclusion you enjoy is the Count’s doing; the money you spend comes from him; his protection extends to every detail. He has saved you before the world; he invented reasons for your disappearance—the Cecile wreck, the journey to Havana for an aunt’s fortune; he sent agents and received hopeful letters. He takes precautions to hide you as you hide yourself; he obeys you.”

“That is enough,” she said. “From whom do you know all this?”

“My uncle got a penniless youth a place as secretary to the Commissary of Police. That young man told me everything. If you leave this house tonight, your husband will know where you have gone—his care will follow you. How could you believe shopkeepers buy flowers at their sale price? Ask a thousand crowns for a bouquet and you will get it. No mother’s ingenuity equaled your husband’s. The porter told me the Count often comes behind the fence at night to see the glimmer of your lamp. Your cashmere shawl cost six thousand francs—your old-clothes-seller brings you fresh things from the best makers. You live like Venus in Vulcan’s toils; you are alone in a prison fashioned by sublime magnanimity for seven years.”

The Countess trembled like a trapped swallow. She studied me defiantly, her dry eyes glittering; then she wept—not from touch, but from helplessness. She had been proud of her independence; marriage pressed on her like a cell.

“I will go!” she cried through her tears. “He forces me; I will go where no one will surely follow.”

“What? You would kill yourself? Madame, you must have powerful reasons to refuse Comte Octave.”

“Certainly I have.”

“Tell them to me, to my uncle. We will be devoted advisers. My uncle is a priest in the confessional, but a man in company. We will hear you; perhaps we can clear a misapprehension. If you are guiltless, we will say so; if you have wronged, your fault may be expiated. In me you have a sincere friend. If you wish to evade the Count’s tyranny, I will find you means—he shall not find you.”

“There is always a convent,” she said.

“Yes. But the Count, as Minister, can procure your rejection from any convent. Even so, I will save you—only when you prove you cannot and ought not to return. Do not fear that you will escape his power only to fall into mine. You shall have peace, solitude, independence, as if you were an ugly old maid. I myself would never see you without your consent.”

“And how? By what means?”

“That is my secret. I am not deceiving you. Prove this is the only life you can lead, better than being Comtesse Octave—rich, admired, in the finest house, beloved by your husband, a happy mother—and I will decide for you.”

“But will there never be a man who understands me?”

“No. And that is why I appeal to religion to decide. The Cure of the White Friars is a saint of seventy-five. My uncle is not a Grand Inquisitor; he is Saint John—Fenelon to you.”

“No, monsieur, the convent is my last hope. There is none but God who understands me. No man, not Augustine, could enter into the scruples of my conscience, which form Dante’s circles, whence there is no escape. Another than my husband has had all my love. No, he did not take it; I gave it as a mother gives a child a toy it breaks. For me there cannot be two loves. In some natures love is not a trial; it is, or it is not. That eighteen months for me were like eighteen years; I poured myself into them, and they left me exhausted. The cup of happiness is broken. I have no weapons left. I had but one name—Honorine—and one heart. My husband had the young girl; a worthless lover had the woman—nothing is left. Then let myself be loved! That is the idea you mean to offer. But I rebel at being a prostitute! I could imagine surrendering to another man’s love, but to Octave’s? No, never.”

“You love him.”

“I esteem, respect, venerate him; he has done me no harm; he is kind and tender; but I can never love him. We will talk no more. I will put my thoughts in writing; I am suffocating, feverish; all I see reminds me of things I wish to forget. I must fly as I fled my home.”

“Where will you go? Can a woman exist unprotected? At thirty, in glory and beauty and tenderness to give, are you prepared to live where I could hide you? Be at ease. The Count, who for nine years has never shown himself here, will never go there without your permission. Your nine years of his devotion guarantee your tranquillity. Discuss the future with my uncle and me. My uncle weighs the hearts of kings; he will be as tender as your flowers.”

I left the Countess at midnight; she seemed calm but depressed, with a purpose none could guess. I found the Count a few paces off in the Rue Saint-Maur. Drawn by irresistible attraction, he had quit the rendezvous on the Boulevards.

“What a night my poor child will suffer!” he cried when I finished. “Suppose I went to her! Suppose she saw me suddenly?”

“At this moment she might throw herself out of the window,” I replied. “The Countess is one of those Lucretias who could not survive such violence, even into the arms of a man she could embrace.”

“You are young,” he said. “In a soul tossed by such alternatives the will is like a lake lashed by storm; the wind changes and the waves drive alternately to each shore. Tonight it is as likely that on seeing me she might rush into my arms as that she would throw herself out.”

“And you would accept those chances?”

“Well, come,” he said, “I have at home a dose of opium from Desplein to send me to sleep without risk.”

Next day Gobain brought word that the Countess had taken a soothing draught and slept from six.

This is her letter, of which I kept a copy—for you, mademoiselle,” said the Consul to Camille. “Literature may simulate pathos, but nothing is so terrible as truth. Here is the letter written by anguish:

MONSIEUR MAURICE,—

I know what your uncle would say; he is not better informed than my conscience. Conscience is God’s interpreter to man. I know that if I do not reconcile with Octave I shall be damned; that is religious law. Civil law condemns me to obey. If my husband does not reject me, the world will regard me as pure whatever I have done. Marriage has this sublimity; society ratifies the husband’s forgiveness, but forgiveness must be accepted. Religiously, legally, socially I ought to return. Keeping to the human aspect, is it not cruel to refuse him happiness, to deprive him of children, to blot his name from the Golden Book and the peers? My selfish suffering ought to be sacrificed to family. I would be a mother; the caresses of my child would wipe tears; I would be looked up to. So God, law, world are in accord.

“What are you rebelling against?” heaven and the pulpit and the judge ask. Your uncle would speak of celestial grace that floods the heart when one does duty.

God, law, world, and Octave desire my life. If there is no other difficulty, my reply cuts the knot: I will not live. I will become white and innocent in death. This is not mulish obstinacy. That obstinacy in a woman results from confidence, from a vision of the future. Though my husband may forget all, I shall not. Does forgetfulness depend on will? When a widow remarries love makes a girl; but I cannot love Count Octave. Each time my eyes met his I should see my sin, even when his eyes are full of love. His generosity would measure my crime. My eyes would read an invisible condemnation. Marriage cannot give me the cruel rapture of passion. I would kill my husband by coldness, by comparisons he might guess. I might be misled by suspicion; I might die, perhaps by my own oversusceptibility or by believing some innocent sign a reproach.

What torture for both! Octave would doubt me, I doubt him. I would give him a rival unworthy of him, a man I despise, with whom I had raptures branded like fire—my shame, which I cannot forget.

Have I shown my heart enough? No one can convince me love may be renewed; I neither can nor will accept love from anyone. A young bride is a plucked flower; a guilty wife is a flower trodden underfoot. You, florist, know whether a broken stem can be restored, whether bruised corolla can be smoothed. If a botanist could remake a flower, he would be God! God alone can remake me. I drink my bitter cup of expiation; but expiation is not annihilation.

In my little house, alone, I eat bread soaked with tears; but no one sees me weep. If I go back to Octave I must hide my tears—they would offend him. How many virtues must a woman trample, not to give herself, but to restore herself to a betrayed husband? God alone can count them. A woman has courage if the husband knows nothing; she deceives to secure him double happiness. But common knowledge is degrading. If I could exchange humiliation for ecstasy, would Octave feel my consent was sheer depravity? Marriage rests on esteem, on mutual sacrifices; but neither Octave nor I could esteem each other after reunion. He would love me like an old man loves a courtesan; I should forever feel shame, a chattel instead of a lady. I would represent pleasure, not virtue. These are the bitter fruits of sin. I have made a bed of burning coals, a sleepless pillow.

Here, when I suffer, I bless my sufferings. But in my husband’s house I should be full of terror, tasting joys I have no right to. All this is feeling of a soul hollowed by seven years of suffering. Religion gives answers: this suffering is my punishment, and God will give me strength. This argument suits pious souls with energy I lack. I have chosen between this hell, where God does not forbid my blessing Him, and the hell that awaits me under Count Octave’s roof.

One word more. If I were still a girl, with my experience, my husband would be the man I should choose; that is why I refuse. I could not bear to blush before him. What! always on my knees, he standing upright; if we reversed positions I should scorn him! I will not be better treated by him because of my sin. The angel who could venture on liberties permissible when both are blameless is not on earth. Octave is full of delicate feeling, but even in his generous soul there is no guarantee for the new life I should lead with him.

Come then and tell me where you will find the solitude and peace you promised.

I had copied the letter and went to the Rue Payenne. Anxiety had conquered opium. Octave paced his garden like a madman.

“Answer that!” I said, handing him the letter. “Try to reassure the modesty of experience. It’s harder than conquering the curiosity of ignorance.”

“She is mine!” cried the Count, joy flooding his face as he read. He signed me away, to be alone. I understood extreme happiness and extreme pain obey the same laws. I went to receive Madame de Courteville and Amelie, who dined with the Count that day. Seeing Amelie, I reflected on love’s three aspects. The woman who could inspire perfect love is rare. Comparing Amelie with Honorine, the erring wife seemed more attractive than the pure girl. To Honorine fidelity had been inevitable; Amelie would solemnly promise without grasping the weight of promise. The crushed woman seemed sublime; she demanded all a man’s generosity and strength, giving zest to happiness; Amelie, chaste and confiding, would settle into peaceful motherhood without struggle or victory.

Of the plains of Champagne and the storm-swept Alps, what young man would choose the chalky level? Such comparisons are wrong on the threshold of marriage. Experience teaches that marriage excludes passion; a family cannot rest on tempests of love. At twenty-five I did not trust myself; I took a manful resolution.

I returned to the Count to announce his relations’ arrival and found him young again in hope.

“What ails you, Maurice?” he asked, struck by my changed mien.

“Monsieur le Comte—”

“No longer Octave? You to whom I owe my life—”

“My dear Octave, if you succeed in bringing back the Countess, she must never see me again; she must never know Maurice was your secretary. Never mention my name, or all will be undone. You gave me an appointment as Maître des Requêtes—get me instead a diplomatic post abroad, a consulship, and don’t think of my marrying Amelie. I will play my part to the end.”

“Poor boy!” he said, pressing my hand, holding back tears.

We then agreed my role that evening at Honorine’s house, where I returned. It was August; the day had been hot. She sat on a wooden bench under an arbor in white muslin with blue bows, hair unadorned, feet on a small stool, and did not rise; she motioned me to sit.

“Now, is not life at a deadlock for me?” she said.

“Life as you have made it,” I answered. “But not the life I propose. If you choose, you may be very happy.”

“How?” she asked, her whole being a question.

“Your letter is in the Count’s hands.” She started like a frightened doe, paced the garden, then returned to the drawing-room where I joined her after giving time to the pain.

“You—a friend? Say rather a traitor! A spy sent by my husband.”

“Instinct is keen in women. You wanted an answer, and there was but one man in the world who could write it. You must read his reply, and if after reading it you still think your life a deadlock, the spy will prove a friend; I will place you in a convent beyond the Count’s power. But consider the other side. There is a law, divine and human, which even hatred obeys—do not condemn the accused without hearing his defence. Till now you have been a child, condemning with ears stopped. The devotion of seven years has claims. You must read the Count’s answer, sent through my uncle. He will bring it. In his presence and mine, out of respect for your dignity, you must read it; you must make this sacrifice to the world, to the law, and to God.”

Seeing no attack on her resolve, she consented. Months of work had built to this moment. The Count had set his hopes on it and had reached it.

I remember nothing more formidable than my uncle’s entrance into that Pompadour drawing-room at ten. His fine head, silver hair against black dress, and calm face had a magical effect. The Countess felt balm on her wounds and beamed at his reflected virtue.

“Monsieur the Cure of the White Friars,” said Gobain.

“Are you come with a message of happiness and peace?” I asked.

“Happiness and peace are found in obedience to the Church,” replied my uncle, and he handed the Countess the following letter:

MY DEAR HONORINE,—

If you had read the letter I wrote five years ago you would have spared yourself five years of useless labor and privations. In it I proposed an arrangement to relieve your fears and make domestic life possible. I have much to reproach myself with; in seven years of sorrow I discovered errors. I misunderstood marriage and failed to scent danger when it threatened you. An angel was in the house. The Lord bade me guard it, and punished me for my audacity.

You cannot lash yourself without striking me. Have mercy, my dear Honorine. I so appreciated your susceptibilities that I would not bring you back to the Rue Payenne where I can live without you, but I am decorating another house in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré to which, in hope, I will conduct not a wife secured by law but a sister who will allow me to press on her brow a father’s kiss.

Will you deprive me of the right I have conquered—the right to watch over your needs, pleasures, life? Women always have their mother’s heart; you never knew any mother but mine. My affection is neither mean nor grasping; it is one that never lets annoyance last. What can you think of the companion of your childhood if you believe him capable of accepting trembling kisses, of living between delight and anxiety? Do not fear suppliant passion; I would not want you back until certain of my strength to leave you free.

Your solitary pride has exaggerated difficulties. You may look on life as brother or father without suffering; you will find neither mockery nor indifference. The warmth of our life will be equable, without tempests. If later you desire pleasures or amusements, you can expand their circle. The tenderness of a mother knows neither contempt nor pity. In me admiration shall hide every sentiment you might see as an offence.

We may be magnanimous: the kindness of a sister and the thoughtfulness of a friend will satisfy him who wishes to be your companion. Neither of us will be jealous of the past; we will look only forward.

You will be at home in my new house as in Rue Saint-Maur—unapproachable, alone, free; but with the legitimate protection and consideration of a woman, and the fortune to do good. When you long for absolution, ask for it; it will not be forced by Church or Law; it will wait on your pride. If this compact does not suit you, I have begged the saintly man who takes charge of this letter not to speak for me. I will not owe your return to terrors of the Church or the Law. I will not accept simple happiness from anyone but yourself. If you persist in solitude, my will yields to yours. You shall be no more troubled than before. I will get rid of the crazy fellow who meddled in your affairs and perhaps annoyed you...

“Madame,” said Honorine, folding the letter and placing it at her heart, “thank you. I will avail myself of Monsieur le Comte’s permission to remain here—”

“Ah!” I cried.

My exclamation made my uncle look uneasy and threw a mischievous glance from the Countess that enlightened me as to her motive. She had wanted to test whether I was an actor, a spy; and my cry, from the heart, deceived her. “Ah, Maurice,” she said, “you know how to love.” The light in my eyes was another answer, and the Count found me useful to the end.

Honorine finished the Count’s letter. My uncle signed to me to go. “Let us leave the Countess,” he said. “You are going already, Maurice?” she asked, without looking. She rose, still reading, and followed us to the door. On the threshold she took my hand, pressed it affectionately, and said, “We shall meet again—”

“No,” I replied, wringing her hand; she cried out. “You love your husband. I leave tomorrow.” I rushed away, leaving my uncle, who, with a look meaning “He is mad,” completed my part.

Six days later I set out with an appointment as vice-consul in Spain, where I could rise toward a consulship. After I had settled, I received this letter from the Count:

MY DEAR MAURICE,—

If I were happy I should not write, but I have entered a new life of suffering. I have grown young again in desire, with the impatience of forty and the prudence of a diplomat. When you left I had not yet been admitted to the pavilion in the Rue Saint-Maur, but a letter promised permission—the mild, melancholy letter of a woman who dreaded agitation. After waiting more than a month I called and had Gobain inquire whether I could be received. I sat in a chair in the avenue near the lodge, my head in my hands, for an hour.

“Madame had to dress,” said Gobain, to hide her hesitancy under a pride of appearance that flattered me.

For a quarter of an hour we both trembled like speakers on a platform, exchanging sacred phrases as those surprised who “make believe” conversation.

“You see, Honorine,” said I, tearful, “the ice is broken; I am so tremulous with happiness that you must forgive my incoherence. It will be so for a long time.”

“There is no crime in being in love with your wife,” she said with forced smile.

“Do me the favor,” I said, “no longer to work as you do. I have heard you have lived on savings; you have sixty thousand francs a year. If you cannot give me your heart, at least do not abandon your fortune to me.”

“I have long known your kindness,” she said.

“Though you prefer to remain here and preserve independence, do not toil.”

I gave her three certificates for twelve thousand francs each; she took them, opened them languidly, and gave me only a look. She understood I was offering freedom, not money.

“I am conquered,” she said, holding out her hand, which I kissed. “Come and see me as often as you like.”

So she had done violence to herself in receiving me. Next day she showed affected high spirits; habit took two months before I saw her true character. Then it was like May, a spring of love giving ineffable bliss; she was no longer afraid and studied me. Alas! when I proposed she go to England and then return openly to my house, she was seized with alarm.

“Why not live always as we are?” she said.

I submitted and asked myself, “Is she making an experiment?” On my way from my house to the Rue Saint-Maur thought of love swelled in my heart and I said, like a young man, “This evening she will yield.”

All my force was blown away by a smile, by a command from proud, calm eyes untouched by passion. I remembered the words you once quoted, “Lucretia’s dagger wrote in letters of blood the watchword of woman’s charter—Liberty!” They froze me. I felt the necessity of her consent and how impossible to wring it from her. Could she guess my storms as I left?

At last I painted my situation in a letter, giving up speaking. Honorine made no answer and was so sad I pretended not to have written. I was grieved at the thought of distressing her; she read my heart and forgave me. Three days ago she received me, for the first time, in her blue-and-white room—bright with flowers and light. Honorine was in a gown that made her bewitching, hair framing her face with Cape heath. She was a bride of old days. My joy chilled; her face was grave, fires beneath the ice.

“Octave,” she said, “I will return as your wife when you will. But understand this submission has dangers. I can be resigned—” I stirred.

“Yes,” she went on. “Resignation offends you; you want what I cannot give—Love. Religion and pity led me to renounce solitude; you are here!” She paused.

“At first,” she continued, “you asked no more. Now you demand your wife. Here I give you Honorine, such as she is, without deceiving you. What shall I be? A mother? I hope it. Try to change me; you have my consent; but if I should die, do not curse my memory; do not call obstinacy what I might call worship of the Ideal, or of something divine! The future will be your concern.”

She sat calm and watched me pale. Seeing the effect she took my hands and said, “Octave, I do love you, but not as you wish. I love your soul. Still, I love you enough to die in your service like an Eastern slave, without regret. It will be my expiation.”

She knelt before me and added, “And perhaps I shall not die!”

For two months I have struggled. What shall I do? My heart is too full; I seek a friend and cry, “What shall I do?”

I did not answer. Two months later the papers announced the Comtesse Octave’s return on an English vessel, restored to her family after adventures invented with sufficient probability to avoid contradiction.

When I moved to Genoa I received a formal announcement of the birth of a son to the Count and Countess. I held that letter for two hours on this bench. Two months later, urged by Octave, M. de Grandville, and Monsieur de Serizy, and broken by my uncle’s death, I agreed to marry.

Six months after the July revolution I received this letter, which concludes this couple’s story:

MONSIEUR MAURICE,—I am dying though I am a mother—perhaps because I am a mother. I have played my part as a wife well; I have deceived my husband. I have had happiness as genuine as an actress’s tears. I am dying for society, for the family, for marriage, as early Christians died for God! I do not know of what I die; I try to find out, for I am not perverse; I am bent on explaining my malady to you—you who brought that heavenly physician, your uncle, at whose word I surrendered. He was my director; I nursed him in his last illness; he showed me the way to heaven, bidding me persevere in duty.

And I have done my duty.

I do not blame those who forget; I admire them as strong natures; but I have the malady of memory! I could not twice feel the love that identifies a woman with her man. To the last, as you know, I cried to your heart and to my husband, “Have mercy!” But there was no mercy. I am dying, dying with stupendous courage. No courtesan was ever gayer. My poor Octave is happy; I let his love feed on illusions. I throw all my powers into this terrible masquerade; the actress is applauded, feasted, smothered in flowers; but the invisible rival comes every day to seek its prey—a fragment of my life. I am rent and I smile. I smile on two children, but the elder, the dead one, will triumph. I told you so. The dead child calls me, and I go to him.

Marriage without love degrades my soul hourly. I can never weep or dream except when alone. The exigencies of society, care of my child, and Octave’s happiness leave me no moment to refresh myself as in solitude. Constant watchfulness starts my heart with alarms. I have not implanted the sharp-eared vigilance that lies with facility; it is not the lip of one I love that cools my burning eyes. My soul is acting a part, and perhaps that is why I die! I lock up my grief so carefully nothing shows; it eats into me and attacks my life.

I said to the doctors, “Make me die of some plausible complaint, or I shall drag my husband with me.”

So it is understood by M. Desplein, Bianchon, and me that I am dying of softening of some bone. Octave believes I adore him. I am afraid lest he follow me. I now beg you be the little Count’s guardian. You will find a codicil in which I express my wish; do not produce it except in need. My devotion may leave Octave inconsolable but willing to live. Poor Octave! I wish him a better wife than I have been; he deserves to be well loved.

Since my spiritual spy is married, I bid him remember what the florist of Rue Saint-Maur bequeaths: May your wife soon be a mother! Fling her into vulgar materialism of household life; hinder her from cherishing in her heart the mysterious flower of the Ideal, that enchanted blossom whose perfume disgusts us with reality. I am a Saint-Theresa who could not live on ecstasy in a convent with the Holy Infant.

You saw me happy among my flowers. I did not tell you all: I saw love budding under your affected madness, and I concealed my thoughts, my poetry; I did not admit you to my kingdom of beauty. Well, you will love my child for love of me if he should lose his father. Keep my secrets as the grave keeps them. Do not mourn for me; I have been dead this many a day, if Saint Bernard was right that where there is no more love there is no more life.

And the Countess died,” said the Consul, putting away the letters and locking his pocket-book.

“Is the Count still living?” asked the Ambassador, “for since July he has disappeared politically.”

“Do you remember, Monsieur de Lora,” said the Consul-General, “seeing me go to the steamboat with—”

“A white-haired man? an old man?” the painter asked.

“An old man of forty-five, going to Southern Italy for health and amusement. That was my poor friend, my patron, passing through Genoa to take leave and place his will in my hands. He appoints me guardian of his son. I had no need to tell him of Honorine’s wishes.”

“Does he suspect himself of murder?” asked Mademoiselle des Touches of the Baron de l’Hostal.

“He suspects the truth,” replied the Consul, “and that is killing him. I remained on the packet till it put to sea; a small boat brought me back. We sat some time saying farewell—for ever, I fear. God only knows how much we love the confidant of our love when she who inspired it is no more.

“That man,” said Octave, “holds a charm and wears an aureole.” The Count went to the prow and looked down on the Mediterranean. Moved, he said: “Ought we not, for human nature’s sake, inquire what irresistible power leads us to sacrifice an exquisite creature to the most fugitive pleasures despite reason? I heard cries in my conscience. Honorine was not alone in her anguish. And yet I would have it... I am consumed by remorse. In Rue Payenne I died of joys I had not; now I shall die in Italy of joys I have had.... Where lay the discord between two natures, equally noble?”

For some minutes the terrace was silent.

Then the Consul asked the two women, “Was she virtuous?”

Mademoiselle des Touches rose, took his arm, and said, “Are not men wrong too when they make a young girl a wife while cherishing at heart some angelic image, comparing us to those unknown rivals and always finding us wanting?”

“Mademoiselle, you would be right if marriage were based on passion; and that was the mistake of those two. Marriage with heart-deep love on both sides would be Paradise.”

She turned and was joined by Claude Vignon, who whispered, “A bit of a coxcomb is M. de l’Hostal.”

“No,” she whispered back, “for he has not guessed that Honorine would have loved him.—Oh!” seeing the Consul’s wife approach, “his wife was listening! Unhappy man!”

Eleven struck by all the clocks, and the guests walked home along the seashore.

“Still, that is not life,” said Mademoiselle des Touches. “That woman was one of the rarest and most extraordinary intellects—a pearl! Life is incidents, pain and pleasure alternating. Dante’s Paradise is found only in the soul; to ask it of life is a luxury nature protests. To such souls the six feet of a cell and the kneeling chair are all they need.”

“You are right,” said Leon de Lora; “but good-for-nothing as I may be, I admire a woman who could live by a studio, under a painter’s roof, never coming down nor seeing the world.”

“Such a thing has been known—for a few months,” said Claude Vignon with irony.

“Comtesse Honorine is not unique,” replied the Ambassador. “A man, a politician, a bitter writer, was the object of such passion; the pistol shot that killed him struck not him alone; the woman who loved lived like a nun thereafter.”

“Then there are yet some great souls in this age!” said Camille Maupin, leaning on the quay balustrade.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy:

Bauvan, Comte Octave de
Bianchon, Horace
Desplein
Fontanon, Abbe
Gaudissart, Felix
Gaudron, Abbe
Granville, Vicomte de (later Comte)
Lora, Leon de
Loraux, Abbe
Popinot, Jean-Jules
Serizy, Comte Hugret de
Touches, Mademoiselle Félicité des
Vignon, Claude

(End of extract.)
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
THE MIDDLE PART OF THE STORY — MIDDLE OF THE STORY.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################