In 1828, about one o’clock in the morning, two men left a large house in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré, near the Élysée-Bourbon. One was the famous doctor Horace Bianchon; the other, one of the most elegant men in Paris, the Baron de Rastignac. They had long been friends. Each had sent away his carriage; no cab was in sight; the night was fine and the pavement dry.

“We will walk as far as the boulevard,” said Eugène de Rastignac. “You can get a hackney cab at the club; there’s always one until daybreak. Come with me as far as my house.”

“With pleasure.”

“Well, and what have you to say about it?”

“About that woman?” the doctor answered coldly.

“There I recognize my Bianchon!” exclaimed Rastignac.

“How?”

“Well, my dear fellow, you speak of the Marquise d’Espard as if she were a case for your hospital.”

“Do you want to know what I think, Eugène? If you throw over Madame de Nucingen for this Marquise, you will swap a one-eyed horse for a blind one.”

“Madame de Nucingen is thirty-six, Bianchon.”

“And this woman is thirty-three,” said the doctor quickly.

“Her worst enemies only say twenty-six.”

“My dear boy, when you really want to know a woman’s age, look at her temples and the tip of her nose. Cosmetics alter much, but not those witnesses to experience. When temples are flaccid, seamed, withered; when the tip of the nose shows minute specks like soot—then she’s over thirty. She may be handsome, witty, loving—whatever you please—but she is past thirty, arriving at maturity. I do not blame men who attach themselves to such women; only, a man of your distinction must not mistake a winter pippin for a little summer apple. Love never studies registers; no one loves a woman because she is handsome or ugly, stupid or clever; we love because we love.”

“Well, for my part, I love for quite other reasons. She is Marquise d’Espard; she was a Blamont-Chauvry; she is the fashion; she has soul; her foot is as pretty as the Duchesse de Berry’s; she has perhaps a hundred thousand francs a year—some day, perhaps, I may marry her! In short, she will put me into a position to pay my debts.”

“I thought you were rich,” interrupted Bianchon.

“Bah! I have twenty thousand francs a year—just enough to keep up my stables. I was thoroughly done, my dear fellow, in that Nucingen business; I will tell you about that. I have got my sisters married; that is the clearest profit since we last met; and I would rather have them provided for than five hundred thousand francs a year. No, what would you have me do? I am ambitious. To what can Madame de Nucingen lead? A year more and I shall be shelved, stuck like a married man. I have all the discomforts of marriage and of single life, without the advantages of either; a false position to which every man must come who remains tied too long to the same apron-string.”

“So you think you will come upon a treasure here?” said Bianchon. “Your Marquise, my dear fellow, does not hit my fancy at all.”

“Your liberal opinions blur your eyesight. If Madame d’Espard were a Madame Rabourdin...”

“Listen to me. Noble or simple, she would still have no soul; she would still be a perfect type of selfishness. Take my word for it, medical men are used to judge people and things; the sharpest of us read the soul while we study the body. Despite that pretty boudoir where we have spent this evening, despite the magnificence of the house, it is quite possible that Madame la Marquise is in debt.”

“What makes you think so?”

“I do not assert it; I am supposing. She talked of her soul as Louis XVIII used to talk of his heart. I tell you this: that fragile fair woman, with her chestnut hair, who pities herself that she may be pitied, has an iron constitution, an appetite like a wolf’s, and the strength and cowardice of a tiger. Gauze, silk, and muslin were never more cleverly twisted round a lie! Ecco.”

“Bianchon, you frighten me! You have learned a good many things, then, since we lived in the Maison Vauquer?”

“Yes, since then, my boy, I have seen puppets, both dolls and manikins. I know something of the ways of fine ladies whose bodies we attend to, saving that which is dearest to them—their child, if they love it—or their pretty faces, which they worship. A man spends his nights by their pillow, wearing himself to death to spare them the slightest loss of beauty; he succeeds, keeps their secret, and they send to ask for his bill and think it horribly exorbitant. Who saved them? Nature. Far from recommending him, they speak ill of him, fearing lest he should become the physician of their best friends.

“My dear fellow, those women you call ‘angels’ I have seen stripped of the little grimaces under which they hide their souls, and of the frippery under which they disguise their defects—without manners and without stays; they are not beautiful.

“We saw a great deal of mud, a great deal of dirt, under the waters of the world when we were aground for a time on the shoals of the Maison Vauquer. What we saw there was nothing. Since I have gone into high society, I have seen monsters dressed in satin, Michonneaus in white gloves, Poirets bedizened with orders, fine gentlemen doing more usurious business than old Gobseck! To the shame of mankind, when I wished to shake hands with Virtue, I found her shivering in a loft, persecuted by calumny, half-starving on fifteen hundred francs a year, regarded as crazy or eccentric.

“In short, my dear boy, the Marquise is a woman of fashion, and I have a particular horror of that kind. Do you want to know why? A woman who has a lofty soul, fine taste, gentle wit, a warm heart, and who lives simply, has no chance of being the fashion. Ergo: a woman of fashion and a man in power are analogous; but the difference is this: the qualities by which a man raises himself ennoble him; whereas the qualities by which a woman gains power for a day are hideous vices; she belies her nature, hides her character, and to live the militant life of the world she must have iron strength under a frail appearance.

“I, as a physician, know that a sound stomach excludes a good heart. Your woman of fashion feels nothing; her rage for pleasure springs from a craving to heat her cold nature, a longing for excitement like an old man standing night after night by the footlights at the opera. As she has more brain than heart, she sacrifices genuine passion and true friends to her triumph, as a general sends his most devoted subalterns to the front to win a battle. The woman of fashion ceases to be a woman; she is neither mother, wife, nor lover. She is, medically speaking, sex in the brain. And your Marquise has all the characteristics of this monstrosity: the beak of a bird of prey, the clear cold eye, the gentle voice—she is polished as steel, she touches everything except the heart.”

“There is some truth in what you say, Bianchon.”

“Some truth?” replied Bianchon. “It is all true. Do you suppose I was not struck by the insulting politeness by which she made me measure the imaginary distance her noble birth sets between us? That I did not feel the deepest pity for her cat-like civilities when I remembered what her object was? A year hence she will not write one word to do me the slightest service, and this evening she pelted me with smiles, believing I can influence my uncle Popinot, on whom the success of her case—”

“Would you rather she should have played the fool with you, my dear fellow?—I accept your diatribe against women of fashion; but you are beside the mark. I should always prefer for a wife a Marquise d’Espard to the most devout and devoted creature on earth. Marry an angel! you would have to go and bury your happiness in the country! The wife of a politician is a governing machine, a contrivance that makes compliments and courtesies. She is the most important and faithful tool an ambitious man can use; a friend who may compromise herself without mischief, and whom he may belie without harm. Fancy Mahomet in Paris in the nineteenth century! His wife would be a Rohan, a Duchesse de Chevreuse of the Fronde, as keen and flattering as an Ambassadress, as wily as Figaro. Your loving wives lead nowhere; a woman of the world leads to everything; she is the diamond with which a man cuts every window when he lacks the golden key. Leave humdrum virtues to the humdrum; ambitious vices to the ambitious.

“Besides, do you imagine the love of a Duchesse de Langeais or de Maufrigneuse, or of a Lady Dudley, does not bestow immense pleasure? If only you knew how much value the cold, severe style of such a woman gives to the smallest evidence of affection! What a delight to see a periwinkle piercing through the snow! A smile from below a fan contradicts the reserve of an assumed attitude, and is worth all the unbridled tenderness of your middle-class women with their mortgaged devotion; for, in love, devotion is nearly akin to speculation.

“And then, a woman of fashion, a Blamont-Chauvry, has her virtues too: fortunes, power, effect, a certain contempt of all that is beneath her—”

“Thank you!” said Bianchon.

“Old curmudgeon!” laughed Rastignac. “Come—do not be so common, do like your friend Desplein; be a Baron, a Knight of Saint-Michel; become a peer of France, and marry your daughters to dukes.”

“I! May the five hundred thousand devils—”

“Come, come! Can you be superior only in medicine? Really, you distress me...”

“I hate that sort of people; I long for a revolution to deliver us from them forever.”

“And so, my dear Robespierre of the lancet, you will not go tomorrow to your uncle Popinot?”

“Yes, I will,” said Bianchon; “for you I would go to hell to fetch water...”

“My good friend, you really touch me. I have sworn that a commission shall sit on the Marquis. Why, here is even a long-saved tear to thank you.”

“But,” Bianchon went on, “I do not promise to succeed as you wish with Jean-Jules Popinot. You do not know him. However, I will take him to see your Marquise the day after tomorrow; she may get round him if she can. I doubt it. If all the truffles, all the Duchesses, all the mistresses, and all the charmers in Paris were there in full bloom; if the King promised him the Prairie, and the Almighty gave him the Order of Paradise with the revenues of Purgatory, not one of all these powers would induce him to transfer a single straw from one saucer of his scales to the other. He is a judge, as Death is Death.”

They had reached the office of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, at the corner of the Boulevard des Capucines.

“Here you are at home,” Bianchon laughed, as he pointed to the ministerial residence. “And here is my carriage,” he added, calling a hackney cab. “And these—express our fortune.”

“You will be happy at the bottom of the sea, while I am still struggling with tempests on the surface till I sink and go to ask you for a corner in your grotto, old fellow!”

“Till Saturday,” replied Bianchon.

“Agreed,” said Rastignac. “And you promise me Popinot?”

“I will do all my conscience will allow. Perhaps this appeal for a commission covers some little dramorama, to use a word of our good bad times.”

“Poor Bianchon! he will never be anything but a good fellow,” said Rastignac to himself as the cab drove off.

“Rastignac has given me the most difficult negotiation,” thought Bianchon as he rose next morning, remembering the delicate commission intrusted to him. “However, I have never asked a service of my uncle in Court, and have paid more than a thousand visits gratis for him. And, after all, we are not apt to mince matters between ourselves. He will say Yes or No, and there an end.”

After this, the famous physician bent his steps at seven in the morning towards the Rue du Fouarre, where dwelt Monsieur Jean-Jules Popinot, judge of the Lower Court of the Department of the Seine. The Rue du Fouarre—an old word meaning straw—was once, in the thirteenth century, the most important street in Paris. There stood the Schools of the University, where Abelard and Gerson were heard. It is now one of the dirtiest streets of the Twelfth Arrondissement, the poorest quarter of Paris, where two-thirds of the population lack fuel in winter, many children are left at the Foundling, many beggars go to the poorhouse, many rag-pickers haunt the corners, many decrepit old folks sun themselves against walls, and many delinquents go to the police courts.

Halfway down this damp street, where a gutter carries blackened waters from some dye-works to the Seine, there is an old house, restored no doubt under Francis I, built of bricks held by a few courses of masonry. Its front wall bellies under the first floor, crushed by the floors above, but upheld by the ground floor. At first it seems as if the piers between the windows must give way, but one perceives that the old bricks and time-eaten stones preserve their center of gravity.

At every season the solid piers of the ground floor wear the yellow tone and the damp sweating surface of old stone. The passerby feels chilled near this wall, where worn corner-stones ineffectually shelter him from wheels. As in houses built before carriages, the doorway vault forms a very low archway like the barbican of a prison. To the right of this entrance are three windows protected by close iron gratings; the panes are dirty and dusty; to the left are two similar windows, one sometimes open, exposing the porter, his wife, and children—swarming, working, cooking, eating, and screaming—in a floored and wainscoted room where everything is dropping to pieces, into which you descend two steps—a depth hinting at the gradual elevation of Paris soil.

If on a rainy day a foot-passenger takes refuge under the long vault with projecting lime-washed beams leading from the door to the staircase, he will pause and look at the interior. To the left is a square garden-plot of not more than four long steps in each direction: black soil, trellises bereft of vines, where papers collect, old rags, potsherds, bits of mortar fallen from the roof; a barren ground where time has shed on the walls and on the trunks and branches of the trees a powdery deposit like soot. The two parts of the house, set at a right angle, draw light from this garden-court shut in by two adjoining houses built on wooden piers, decrepit and ready to fall, where on each floor grotesque evidence appears of the craft pursued by some lodger. Here long poles hang with immense skeins of dyed worsted out to dry; there, on ropes, clean shirts dance; higher up, on a shelf, volumes display freshly marbled edges; women sing, husbands whistle, children shout; a carpenter saws, a copper-turner makes metal screech; industries combine to produce distracting noise.

The general decoration of this passage—neither courtyard, garden, nor vaulted way, though a little of all—consists of wooden pillars on square stone blocks forming arches. Two archways open onto the little garden; two others, facing the front gateway, lead to a wooden staircase with an iron balustrade once a miracle of smith’s work; the worn steps creak. The entrance to each flat has an architrave dark with dirt, grease, and dust, and outer doors covered with Utrecht velvet set with brass nails, once gilt, in a diamond pattern. These relics of splendor show that in Louis XIV’s time the house was the residence of some councillor to the Parlement, some rich priest, or some treasurer of ecclesiastical revenue. But these vestiges of former luxury bring a smile by the contrast of past and present.

M. Jean-Jules Popinot lived on the first floor, where gloom natural to first floors in Paris was increased by the street’s narrowness. This tenement was known throughout the twelfth arrondissement, which Providence had blessed with this lawyer, as it gives a beneficent plant to cure or alleviate every malady. Here is a sketch of the man whom the brilliant Marquise d’Espard hoped to fascinate.

M. Popinot, as befits a magistrate, was always dressed in black—a style which made him ridiculous to those judging by surface. Men who insist on the dignity of black ought to devote themselves to constant and minute care of person; but Popinot was incapable of forcing himself to the puritanical cleanliness black demands. His trousers, always threadbare, looked like camlet—the stuff of attorneys’ gowns; his habitual stoop had creased them into whitish, rusty, or shiny lines, betraying sordid avarice or unheeding poverty. His coarse worsted stockings were twisted in ill-shaped shoes. His linen had the tawny tinge of long sojourn in a wardrobe, showing that the late Madame Popinot had a mania for much linen; perhaps in the Flemish fashion she washed only twice a year. The old man’s coat and waistcoat matched the rest. He always had the luck of his carelessness; the first day he put on a new coat he unfailingly matched it to the rest by staining it with incredible promptitude. He waited till his housekeeper told him his hat was too shabby before buying a new one. His necktie was crumpled and starchless; he never set his dog-eared collar straight after his judge’s bands had disordered it. He took no care of his gray hair and shaved but twice a week. He never wore gloves and usually kept his hands stuffed into empty pockets; the soiled pocket-holes, almost always torn, completed his slovenliness.

Anyone who knows the Palais de Justice, where every variety of black attire may be studied, can imagine Popinot. The habit of sitting for days modifies the body as the fatigue of hearing interminable pleadings tells on a magistrate’s face. Shut up in courts ridiculously small, devoid of architectural dignity, and vitiating the air, a Paris judge acquires a countenance puckered by reflection and weariness; his complexion turns pallid, earthy or greenish. In short, in time the most blooming young man becomes an “inasmuch” machine—an instrument applying the Code with the indifference of clockwork.

Thus, nature had not favored Popinot’s exterior; his life as a lawyer had not improved it. His frame was graceless and angular. Thick knees, huge feet, and broad hands contrasted with a priest-like face vaguely resembling a calf’s head—meek to unmeaningness, little brightened by divergent bloodless eyes divided by a straight flat nose, surmounted by a flat forehead, flanked by enormous ears, flabby and graceless. Thin, weak hair showed baldness through irregular partings.

One feature, however, commended this face to the physiognomist. He had a mouth whose lips divine kindness lent sweetness. They were wholesome, full, red, finely wrinkled, sinuous, mobile—expressive of noble feelings; lips that spoke to the heart and proclaimed intelligence, lucidity, a gift of second-sight, and a heavenly temper; and one would judge him wrongly if assessing only his sloping forehead, fireless eyes, and shambling gait. His life matched his face: full of secret labor, hiding the virtue of a saint. His superior knowledge of law recommended him when Napoleon reorganized it in 1808 and 1811; by Cambacérès’ advice he was one of the first named to the Imperial High Court of Justice at Paris. Popinot was no schemer. Whenever any demand for an appointment was made, the Minister overlooked Popinot, who never set foot in the Chancellor’s house. From the High Court he was sent down to the Common Court, pushed to the lowest rung by active men. He was appointed supernumerary judge. There was a general outcry among lawyers: “Popinot a supernumerary!” Such injustice shocked the legal world—attorneys, registrars—all but Popinot himself, who made no complaint. After the first clamour, everybody was satisfied that all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds—the legal world. Popinot remained supernumerary judge until the day when the most famous Great Seal under the Restoration avenged the oversights of the Empire’s Chief Justices. After twelve years as a supernumerary, M. Popinot would no doubt die a puisne judge of the Court of the Seine.

To account for the obscure fortunes of one of the superior legal men, we must enter into details revealing his life and showing some wheels of the great machine called Justice. M. Popinot was classed by three Presidents who successively controlled the Court of the Seine as the stuff of which judges are made. Thus classified, he did not achieve the reputation his labors deserved. Just as a painter is fenced into landscape or portrait by critics who assume ganglions in every brain, so Popinot’s fate was sealed, hedged to do a particular kind of work. Magistrates, attorneys, pleaders—those who pasture on the legal common—distinguish two elements in every case: law and equity. Equity grows from facts; law is the application of principles to facts. A man may be right in equity but wrong in law, without blame to the judge. Between conscience and facts is a gulf of determining reasons unknown to the judge, but which condemn or legitimize the act. A judge’s duty is to adapt facts to principles, to judge infinite variety by a fixed standard.

France employs about six thousand judges; no generation has six thousand great men, much less in the legal profession. Popinot, in Parisian civilization, was just a very clever cadi who, by the character of his mind and by rubbing the letter of the law into the essence of facts, had learned to see the error of spontaneous, violent decisions. By judicial second-sight he could pierce the double casing of lies in which advocates hide a trial’s heart. He was a judge as the great Desplein was a surgeon; he probed consciences as the anatomist probed bodies. His life and habits led to an exact appreciation of secret thoughts by thorough study of facts.

He sifted a case as Cuvier sifted the earth’s crust. Like that great thinker, he proceeded from deduction to deduction before drawing conclusions, reconstructing a conscience’s past career as Cuvier reconstructed an Anoplotherium. Considering a brief he would often wake at night, startled by a gleam of truth. Struck by deep injustice—which is the end of contests where everything favors the rogue—he often favored equity over law in cases of divination. Hence his colleagues called him impractical; his two-line deductions made deliberations lengthy. When Popinot perceived their dislike he gave his opinion briefly; it was said he was not a good judge in this class; but as his discrimination was remarkable, his opinion lucid, and his penetration profound, he was considered apt for the laborious duties of an examining judge. So he remained most of his career.

Although his qualifications fitted him for difficult functions and he had a reputation in criminal law, the kindness of his heart constantly tortured him, and he was pinched between conscience and pity. The services of an examining judge are better paid than civil judges’ but not tempting; they are onerous. Popinot, modest and virtuous, without ambition, an indefatigable worker, never complained; he sacrificed his tastes and compassionate soul to the public good and allowed himself to be transported to the noisome pools of criminal examinations, where he showed himself severe and beneficent. His clerk sometimes gave accused men money for tobacco or a warm garment as he led them back to the Souricière, the House of Detention. He knew how to be inflexible and charitable. No one extracted a confession so easily without judicial trickery. He had the acumen of an observer. This man, apparently foolishly good-natured, simple, and absent-minded, could guess all the cunning of a prison wag, unmask the astutest street-hussy, and subdue a scoundrel. Unusual circumstances had sharpened his perspicacity; but to relate them we must intrude on his domestic history, for in him the judge was the social side of the man; another, greater and less known, existed within.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Twelve years before this story opens, in 1816, during a scarcity that coincided with the Allies’ occupation of France, Popinot was named President of the Commission Extraordinary to distribute food to the neighborhood poor, just as he contemplated leaving the Rue du Fouarre, which they disliked. A great lawyer and clear-sighted criminal judge—whose superiority seemed aberrant to colleagues—he had for five years observed legal outcomes without understanding their causes. As he climbed into garret rooms, saw poverty, and studied the necessities that drive the poor to crime, compassion filled him. The judge became in effect a Saint Vincent de Paul to these grown children, these suffering toilers.

The transformation was not sudden. Charity can be dangerous to the benefactor’s purse, as gambling is to a player. Popinot went from misery to misery; after a year of lifting rags that hide public pauperism, he became the quarter’s Providence. He joined the Benevolent Committee and the Charity Organization. Wherever gratuitous service was needed he was ready, doing everything without fuss, like a man who spends his life carrying soup where folk starve.

Popinot worked on a larger scale and higher plane: he prevented crime, found work for the unemployed, sheltered the helpless, apportioned aid where danger threatened, counseled widows, protected homeless children, and became the sleeping partner of small traders. No one at the Courts or in Paris knew of this secret life. Some virtues are so splendid they require obscurity; men hide them under a bushel. Those he succored—hard-working by day, tired by night—were little able to praise him; theirs was the gracelessness of people who can never repay because they owe too much. Yet Popinot kept a ledger like a tradesman to avoid ruin by kindness: all the neighborhood’s sorrows were entered in a book, each with a small account, as merchants keep customers’ ledgers. When help was needed he could command information from the police.

Lavienne, a man made for his master, was his aide-de-camp. He redeemed or renewed pawn-tickets and visited districts most threatened with famine while his master sat in court. From four till seven in summer and six till nine in winter the room at the bottom of Popinot’s house filled with women, children, and paupers while he gave audience. No stove was needed; the crowd warmed the air; Lavienne strewed straw on the wet floor. Over time the benches shone from use; at shoulder height the walls bore a dark coating left by rags. The poor loved Popinot so much that they would assemble before his door before daybreak without disturbing his sleep; rag-pickers and other night toilers often saw a light burning in his private room at unholy hours. Even thieves, passing by, said, “That is his house,” and respected it. The morning he gave to the poor, mid-day to criminals, the evening to legal work.

Thus Popinot’s gift of observation was bifrons: he perceived a pauper’s virtues—incipient good deeds and unrecognized self-sacrifice—just as he could read at the bottom of a man’s conscience the faintest outlines of crime and infer the rest.

Popinot’s inherited fortune was a thousand crowns a year. His wife, sister to M. Bianchon Senior of Sancerre, had brought him about twice as much and, dying five years earlier, left it to him. As a supernumerary judge his salary was small, and he had been fully salaried only four years, explaining his parsimony despite great beneficence. His indifference to dress—an absent-minded air—seemed a sign of scientific pursuit. To complete the portrait: Popinot was one of the few judges of the Court of the Seine who had not received the Legion of Honor.

Such was the man instructed by the President of the Second Chamber of the Court—to which Popinot had belonged since his reinstatement—to examine the Marquis d’Espard at his wife’s request for a Commission in Lunacy.

The Rue du Fouarre, where so many unhappy wretches swarmed in the early morning, would be deserted by nine and as gloomy and squalid as ever. Bianchon put his horse to a trot to find his uncle amid his business, amused at the contrast Popinot would present in Madame d’Espard’s drawing-room and promising himself he would persuade the judge to dress less ridiculously.

At the sound of wheels half a dozen paupers came from under the gateway and took off their hats on recognizing Bianchon; the doctor, who treated gratuitously the sick recommended by the lawyer, was also well known to the poor.

Bianchon found his uncle in the middle of the parlor, where benches were occupied by grotesquely dressed patients in attitudes a draughtsman might have composed as a picture: an old man with a white beard and apostolic head; a young woman suckling a newborn with another child between her knees; a man promising a future street urchin; an old woman with the repulsive look of rebellious pauperism; a young workman, weak but bright-eyed, with faculties crushed by necessity. The majority were women; husbands gone to work left them to plead the family’s cause with the ingenuity typical of the people. You would have seen torn bandanas, mud-deep skirts, ragged kerchiefs and worn jackets, but eyes that burned like live coals. It was a horrible assemblage, first disgusting, then terrifying when one perceived their resignation was a speculation on benevolence. Two tallow candles lighted the parlor, flickering in a fog caused by the fetid air.

The magistrate himself was not the least picturesque. He wore a rusty cotton night-cap; lacking a cravat, his reddened neck showed beneath the threadbare collar of his old dressing-gown. His worn face had the absorbed look of attention; his lips were puckered; his knitted brows seemed to bear the burden of many confided sorrows: he felt, analyzed, and judged them all. As watchful as a money-lender, he rarely raised his eyes from his books and registers except to look into the hearts of those he examined with the flashing glance of a miser alarmed.

Lavienne, behind him, ready to carry out orders, served as a sort of police and welcomed newcomers, encouraging them to overcome shyness. When the doctor appeared there was a stir on the benches. Lavienne turned and was surprised to see Bianchon.

“Ah! It is you, old boy!” Popinot exclaimed, stretching. “What brings you so early?”

“I was afraid you might make an official visit about which I wished to speak to you before I could see you.”

“Well,” said the lawyer, addressing a stout little woman near him, “if you do not tell me what you want, I cannot guess it, child.”

“Make haste,” said Lavienne. “Do not waste other people’s time.”

The woman, red and speaking low, said she had a green-grocery truck, her last baby to nurse, and owed for his keep. She had hidden her little money. Popinot guessed the sequel, asked names—“La Pomponne” and husband “Toupinet”—and, turning over his register, found the husband imprisoned for debt in the Rue du Petit-Banquier. The woman needed ten francs to buy stock. Lavienne took ten francs from a large bag and handed them to her while Popinot noted the loan. Seeing the thrill of delight that made the poor hawker tremble, Bianchon understood her apprehensions.

“You next,” said Lavienne to an old man with a white beard.

Bianchon drew Lavienne aside and asked how long this audience would last.

“Monsieur has had two hundred persons this morning, and there are eight to be turned off,” said Lavienne. “You will have time to pay your early visit, sir.”

“Here, my boy,” said Popinot, taking Horace by the arm; “here are two addresses near this—one in the Rue de Seine, and the other in the Rue de l’Arbalete. Go there at once. Rue de Seine, a young girl has attempted asphyxiation; Rue de l’Arbalete, you will find a man to remove to your hospital. I will wait breakfast for you.”

Bianchon returned an hour later. The Rue du Fouarre was deserted; day was dawning; his uncle had gone up to his rooms; the last poor wretch whose misery the judge had relieved was departing, and Lavienne’s money bag was empty.

“Well, how are they going on?” asked the old lawyer as the doctor came in.

“The man is dead,” replied Bianchon; “the girl will recover.”

Since a woman’s eye and hand had been lacking, Popinot’s flat bore an aspect in harmony with its master. The indifference of a man absorbed in a dominant idea left its stamp on everything: dust unconquerable, objects adapted to wrong purposes, papers in flower vases, empty ink-bottles on tables, plates forgotten, matches used as tapers, drawers half-turned out—chaos from plans for order never carried out. The private room, disordered by incessant rummage, testified to his unresting pace: books scattered, registers laid on the floor, the floor unpolished for years.

Tables and shelves were covered with ex votos—offerings of the grateful poor: blue glass jars, frames of artificial flowers with Popinot’s initials, boxes, carved letter-weights, cross-stitched landscapes, embroidered pin-cushions. These works of gratitude and patience formed a dust-laden toyshop, hiding bills, worn pens, and scraps of paper. Some beautifully stuffed birds, eaten by moth, perched amid the trumpery, presided over by an Angora cat—Madame Popinot’s pet—returned no doubt by some impecunious naturalist who repaid charity with his treasure. A local artist had painted portraits of M. and Madame Popinot.

Between the fireplace and the large square table where the magistrate worked, two cups of coffee waited on a small table and two mahogany armchairs awaited uncle and nephew. Daylight, darkened by the windows, could not fully penetrate this corner, so the cook left two dips burning, unsnuffed wicks producing a red light like a miser’s slow-burning candle.

“My dear uncle, you ought to wrap yourself more warmly when you go down to that parlor.”

“I cannot bear to keep them waiting, poor souls! Well, and what do you want of me?”

“I have come to ask you to dine tomorrow with the Marquise d’Espard.”

“A relation of ours?” asked Popinot, with genuine absent-mindedness that made Bianchon laugh.

“No, uncle; the Marquise d’Espard is a high and puissant lady who has laid before the Courts a petition desiring that a Commission in Lunacy should sit on her husband, and you are appointed----”

“And you want me to dine with her! Are you mad?” said the lawyer, taking up the code of proceedings. “Here, read this article prohibiting any magistrate’s eating or drinking in the house of either party in a case he is to decide between. Let her come and see me, your Marquise, if she has anything to say to me. I was to go tomorrow to examine her husband after working the case up to-night.”

He rose, took up a packet under a weight, read its title, and said: “Here is the affidavit. Since you take an interest in this high and puissant lady, let us see what she wants.”

Popinot wrapped his dressing-gown around him, which constantly slipped, leaving his chest bare; he sopped his bread in the half-cold coffee and opened the petition, reading and commenting now and then, with Bianchon joining.

The petition began formally: Madame Jeanne Clémentine Athénaïs de Blamont-Chauvry, wife of Charles Maurice Marie Andoche, Comte de Négrepelisse, Marquis d’Espard—of a good family—living in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré, while M. d’Espard resided in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève. Her solicitor was Maître Desroches.

The petition set out that for a year the Marquis’s moral and intellectual powers had undergone a serious change, reaching dementia and idiocy as provided by the Civil Code, requiring legal remedies for the security of his fortune and person and to protect their children, whom he kept with him. It alleged that the Marquis’s management of affairs showed long-standing misdirection, culminating in a deplorable depression of will; that his income had been paid, without reasonable cause, into the hands of an old woman of repulsive ugliness named Madame Jeanrenaud—sometimes in Paris, sometimes at Villeparisis—and for the benefit of her son, aged thirty-six, an officer now in the King’s Guards, whom the Marquis had placed, by his influence, as Major in the First Regiment of Cuirassiers. These two people, once in extreme poverty in 1814, had since purchased considerable property, including a large house in the Grand Rue Verte; Jeanrenaud was laying out sums to settle there with the woman Jeanrenaud, intending to marry, and these sums already amounted to more than a hundred thousand francs. The marriage had been arranged by the intervention of M. d’Espard with his banker Mongenod, whose niece Jeanrenaud was to marry, and by M. d’Espard’s influence Jeanrenaud had been secured a barony by royal letters patent dated December 29th of the previous year.

The petitioner argued no reason—moral or legal—could justify the influence this Mme. Jeanrenaud exerted over M. d’Espard, who saw her seldom and had little intercourse with her son, yet whenever they needed money they obtained whatever they asked of him; if he lacked ready cash, he drew bills to be paid by Mongenod, who would confirm this. Moreover, on renewal of leases on the Espard estate, tenants paying a premium resulted in Jeanrenaud securing the payment into his own hands.

The petition said the Marquis parted with these sums so little of his own free will that when spoken to he seemed to remember nothing; whenever any weighty person questioned him about his devotion to these two people his replies showed a complete absence of ideas and of a sense of his interests, hinting at some occult cause—criminal or medical—maybe even “possession.” Popinot, reading this, muttered at the clerk’s insinuations; Bianchon laughed but later suggested such influence might be magnetic or hypnotic.

The petition continued that, as early as 1815, to supply sums for these persons, the Marquis had gone with his two children to live in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève in rooms unworthy of his rank; that he kept his children there in a style ill-suited to their prospects; that he often wanted money, so that recently landlord Mariast had levied execution on the furniture, which the Marquis witnessed and treated the bailiff with all marks of respect as if the bailiff were of superior rank. Such facts, the petitioner said, appeared like the acts of a madman: for nearly ten years he had given his thoughts exclusively to China—its customs, manners, and history—referencing everything to a Chinese origin; confusing present events and business with facts relating to China; censuring government and king by comparison with Chinese politics. This monomania had led him to join a commercial undertaking, constantly drawing bills for expenses of his publication, A Picturesque History of China, issued in parts; debts to stationers, printers, lithographers, and colorists had mounted so that tradesmen urged the petitioner to apply for a Commission in Lunacy to preserve their credit.

“The man is mad!” exclaimed Bianchon.

“You think so, do you?” said Popinot. “If you listen to only one bell, you hear only one sound.”

The petition added that the Marquis’s children’s education had been neglected; he taught them Chinese history and dialects contrary to Catholic tenets; that he often left them destitute of necessities; that the petitioner, despite entreaties, could seldom see them and that he brought them to her only once a year. By overreaching in these claims, the petition risked proving nothing: Popinot observed that a mother would be more than resourceful in providing for her children if she truly wished. Yet the petitioner asserted neighbors and acquaintances—Edme Becker, a medical student, Jean Baptiste Frémiot, a professor—after frequent intercourse with the Marquis, believed his Chinese monomania resulted from a plot by Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother to deaden the Marquis’s faculties, since Mme. Jeanrenaud seemed only to procure everything relating to the Chinese Empire for him.

Finally the petitioner claimed that the moneys absorbed by Jeanrenaud and Mme. Jeanrenaud between 1814 and 1828 amounted to at least a million francs. She proposed to present witnesses and evidence and asked the Court to summon the public prosecutor and to charge a judge to make his report and pronounce judgment declaring the Marquis incapable of managing his affairs.

“Damn!” said Popinot. “What do you say to that, doctor? These are strange statements.”

“They might certainly be an effect of magnetic force,” said Bianchon.

“Then do you believe in Mesmer’s nonsense and his tub and seeing through walls?” said Popinot.

“Yes, uncle,” said Bianchon gravely. “I am convinced of the power of the will regarded as a motor force. I have verified analogous facts proving the influence one man may acquire over another. Actions promised during sleep by a magnetized patient to the magnetizer have been performed on waking. The will of one had become the will of the other. Even crimes have been performed under such influence.”

“If it were not from you, I would not listen to such a thing,” muttered the lawyer. “But supposing this so-called possession fell under that class of facts, it would be difficult to prove it as legal evidence.”

“If this woman Jeanrenaud is so hideously old and ugly, I do not see what other means of fascination she can have used,” observed Bianchon.

“In 1814, when this fascination is supposed to have begun, she was fourteen years younger; if connected with M. d’Espard before that, we go back a quarter-century to when she may have been young and pretty and won influence. Though morally reprehensible, her power may be justifiable in nature. Perhaps she was aggrieved by his marriage to Mlle. de Blamont-Chauvry, and at the bottom of all this may be rivalry between women, for the Marquis had for a long time lived apart from Mme. d’Espard.”

“Power of fascination is in direct proportion to ugliness,” Popinot added wryly; “think of smallpox. But to proceed.”

Reading further, Popinot and Bianchon observed the petition’s claim that the Marquis had joined a commercial enterprise, drawing bills which stamped him as a tradesman and threatened his honor and fortune; that the debts from his publication had driven tradesmen to urge the petitioner to seek legal protection; that the Marquis spoke of judges and scholars as mandarins and men of letters, that in ordinary conversation he would say, “They did not do so in China,” and sometimes imagine himself in China. The petitioner offered names of witnesses in the habit of seeing him and asked the Court to take all into account and to order the usual proceedings to declare M. d’Espard legally incompetent.

“My dear boy,” said Popinot at the document’s close, “where is the mother who ever lacked heart and wit and yearning so as to fall below the inspirations suggested by her animal instinct? If your Marquise wanted to give her children food and clothes, the Devil himself would not have hindered her. By proving too much you prove nothing. I know everything. But I shall go tomorrow with my registrar to see M. le Marquis, for this does not seem at all clear to me.”

“Listen, my dear uncle, I have never asked a favor of you concerning your legal functions; well, now I beg you to show Madame d’Espard the kindness her situation deserves. If she came here, you would listen to her?”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, go and listen to her in her house. Madame d’Espard is a sickly, nervous, delicate woman who would faint in your rat-hole. Go in the evening, instead of accepting her dinner, since the law forbids your eating or drinking at your client’s expense.”

“And does not the law forbid you from taking any legacy from your dead?” said Popinot, half in jest as he fancied irony on his nephew’s lips.

“Come, uncle, if only to get at the truth of this business, grant my request. You will come as the examining judge, since matters do not seem clear. Deuce take it! It is as necessary to cross-question the Marquise as it is to examine the Marquis.”

“You are right,” said the lawyer. “It is quite possible that it is she who is mad. I will go.”

“I will call for you. Write down in your engagement book: ‘Tomorrow evening at nine, Madame d’Espard.’” Good! said Bianchon, seeing his uncle make a note of the appointment.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
Next evening at nine Bianchon climbed his uncle’s dusty staircase and found him bent over a complicated judgment. The coat Lavienne had ordered had not arrived, so Popinot wore his old stained coat—the plain, amusing Popinot of public view, ignorant of his private mysteries. Bianchon smoothed his cravat and crossed his uncle’s coat to hide the stains, but the judge soon rucked it in his customary way, revealing the hump, gaps, and wrinkles that betrayed an absurdity Bianchon only noticed as they entered the Marquise’s room.

A brief sketch of the lady before them is necessary. Madame d’Espard had been all the fashion in Paris for seven years. Separated from her husband in 1815, she must have married around 1812; though a mother of children aged fifteen and thirteen and thirty-three “on paper,” she preserved the air of twenty-two. Her artifice was extreme regimen—elaborate curls, twilight salons, filtered light, cold baths, hard pillows, sparing diet and strict habits—combined with nature’s aid to keep her complexion clear, forehead smooth, and figure youthful. She was utterly self-absorbed; men amused but did not move her passions. She neither loved nor hated; when offended she avenged herself coldly and promptly. Having parted from M. d’Espard, who took the children, she retained the house and carriage and lived publicly from 1820, entertaining and establishing a social throne. Her circle included influential women and men; her drawing-room gained political weight—“What do they say at Madame d’Espard’s?” mattered. Ambitious protégés and politicians sought her favor; she worked persistently for those she wished to serve, driven by Vanity and a desire to be at life’s largesse.

She drew many young men—de Marsay, de Ronquerolles, de Montriveau, de Serizy, Maxime de Trailles, the Vandenesses, du Châtelet, among others—men who often accepted the condition that their wives be excluded from her salon. Even two famous royalist bankers endured her terms. She knew how to keep men at a distance, to appear noble while remaining self-centered. Rastignac, hoping to attach himself to her for political advancement, was crushingly aware that she could be a tool and a rival.

The Hôtel d’Espard proclaimed great wealth: a fine staircase, Versailles-style rooms, carriage gates, lodge, stables, footmen in livery. The judge studied these signs, contrasting them with the dignity of poverty he had lately observed, and sought to pierce the misery of grandeur.

They were announced into a pretty boudoir facing the garden. Madame d’Espard sat in an old rococo armchair; Rastignac reclined at her left, and a tall, austere man stood by the chimney-piece. The Marquise, wiry and pallid from her regimen, wore hair banded into curls and used mirrors and costume to craft a long oval face. Popinot entered, hat greasy, left hand in pocket and awkwardly alert; his ridiculous appearance amused Rastignac. The Marquise greeted them with affected weakness.

The man by the fire—upright, lean, dressed in black—was the Chevalier d’Espard, the Marquis’ brother: a severe, knife-bladed face, uncommunicative, judging silently. Popinot, craning forward on his chair, tried not to be cowed by the gilt trappings of fashion as the Marquise began to thank him in syrupy tones.

She spoke of her gratitude for his coming to see an “unhappy client who is too ill to go out.” Popinot’s thoughts, ironically literal, tested her statement—then, in a tone of respect, declared he owed her nothing and that judges should spare no pains in seeking truth, guided by conscience rather than form.

Introductions made, the Marquise told her story: in early 1816 M. d’Espard’s temper changed; he proposed a move to an estate near Briançon that would have ruined her health and habits, she refused, and the next day he left, taking the children and leaving her the use of his house and income. She asked if Popinot had read her petition seeking a Commission in Lunacy against M. d’Espard. She said she had no access to her children’s affection, having been deprived of them.

Popinot pursued practical points: the elder child’s age (the Marquise said fifteen; Popinot noted sixteen), and whether she had ever tried to obtain custody. He remarked that boys of fifteen and thirteen might visit her surreptitiously unless strictly obeying their father. Surprised, she protested ignorance of statements her attorney might have made in the petition. Popinot pursued whether M. d’Espard had known Madame Jeanrenaud before marriage; the Marquise, offended, answered sharply that he had not. When Popinot probed about the Jeanrenauds—madame Jeanrenaud’s appearance, her house, and apparent expenditures—the Marquise vilified the woman as ugly and monstrous and claimed the Jeanrenauds kept an extravagant household: five horses, three carriages, phaeton, brougham, cabriolet, and furniture worth over a hundred thousand francs. Rastignac intervened to estimate such stabling and liveries at fifteen or sixteen thousand francs a year.

Popinot, small-town practical, doubted such sums. He calculated that a million yields scarcely forty thousand francs interest; he doubted that the Jeanrenauds, formerly poor, could spend sixty thousand a year. The Marquise insisted the mother and son had invested money given by M. d’Espard at high rates when funds were 60 to 80, so their income must exceed sixty thousand. She then admitted, almost carelessly, that she spent about the same amount herself. The Chevalier’s silence masked shock; Bianchon, Rastignac, and Popinot exchanged looks. Popinot’s apparently clumsy questions had drawn out evidence that might compromise her.

Popinot explained the legal issue plainly: before depriving a husband of his property the Court must inquire into the petitioner’s motives and finances. If she lived beyond twenty-six thousand francs a year on credit, the Court would suspect self-interest and debts, which could complicate, even discredit, her petition. The law must weigh the petitioner as well as the accused. He suggested she might have legitimate resources—royal pensions, indemnities—but such receipts would normally require the husband’s authority. He warned that M. d’Espard’s counsel would probe her finances and creditors.

The judge’s questions, apparently blunt, were surgical. The Marquise had claimed her children were ill-clothed and ill-fed while she entertained splendidly; Popinot pointed out the contradiction. He mocked her porcelain and furnishings, suggesting that perhaps these were obtained from the Marquis. The Marquise responded with pride and impertinence, accusing him of accusing her. Popinot replied that he wished only to clarify facts; another judge might be less indulgent; the Marquis’ lawyer would be suspicious. She retorted that even owing thirty or fifty thousand francs would be trivial to the d’Espards, but Popinot calmly noted the Court’s duty of vigilance.

When Popinot asked who would be trustee if the Marquis were declared incapable, she named his brother—the silent Chevalier—who bowed. The atmosphere grew tense. Popinot’s simple good nature had unveiled her weak point: asking to deprive her husband of authority while herself apparently living far beyond her modest legal income. The judge pressed: if the family should contest and show she had creditors, her motives might be judged tainted.

At bay, she declared her conduct had been devoted to the children’s future—that by receiving friends, keeping connections, and contracting debts she secured their prospects; she had been acting for their interest. Popinot conceded this might do her honor and that he blamed her for nothing; his duty was to know, weigh, and expose facts.

Tea was brought. Seeing she would not persuade him, the Marquise haughtily dismissed him to do his duty his way and prophesied that he would pity her after questioning the Marquis. Popinot rose respectfully and left. Outside, Rastignac praised the judge’s shrewdness and wondered whether a man like Popinot could be outmaneuvered by society’s grandees. Bianchon shrugged: Popinot could not be bought or cajoled. Popinot mused that many such petitions returned “insufficient evidence” verdicts, and our Code was not faultless: society tolerates attempts at legal manipulation while punishing small thieves severely.

Next day at four Popinot’s summons produced a very stout, wheezing dame who descended from a green landau with difficulty and announced herself as Madame Jeanrenaud. She was nothing like the Marquise’s caricature: pitted with smallpox, red-faced, broad, round, with a pug nose and low forehead; everything about her was round and robust—bright country eyes, a cheerful tone, chestnut hair under a green bonnet, enormous bust and legs, dressed in a green chinchilla gown. She spoke in plain, hearty country speech, insisting she could not possibly use seductive arts to dispossess anyone—“Look at me! Tell me if I am likely to seduce anyone. I cannot tie my own shoes nor stoop.” She explained she had been pretty at seventeen, had married Jeanrenaud, a good man, borne a son who had served in the Imperial Guard; then her husband drowned, she suffered smallpox, and emerged large and hideous. Her “seductive arts” were simply the hardships of life.

When Popinot asked what induced M. d’Espard to give her sums, she said she was “not at liberty” to explain, but protested at the idea anyone would trouble him on her account. She declared she would rather return every sou than cause the man a hair’s distress and hurried off to inform her son of the summons.

Popinot reflected that Madame Jeanrenaud “tells no lies” and resolved to visit the Marquis d’Espard the next day to learn the whole story.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
People who have passed the age when men fritter away their strength know how small incidents can sway great events; hence the importance attached to the following trivial fact. The next day Popinot had an attack of coryza, a complaint not dangerous, inadequately called a cold in the head.

The judge, who did not deem the delay serious, felt a little feverish and stayed at home instead of going to see the Marquis d’Espard. That lost day was decisive for the affair, like the cup of soup Marie de Médici took on the Day of Dupes, which delayed her meeting with Louis XIII and let Richelieu recapture his royal captive.

Before accompanying the lawyer and his registering clerk to the Marquis’s house, it is well to glance at the home and private affairs of this father of sons whom his wife’s petition called mad.

In parts of old Paris some buildings still betray a care for decoration and a respect for permanence. The house where M. d’Espard lived, in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève, was one such old stone mansion, once rich in style but blackened by time and altered by revolutions. The dignitaries who formerly dwelt near the University had vanished with the great ecclesiastical foundations; the house had become the dwelling of industry and plebeian tenants. During the last century a printing establishment had worn down polished floors, soiled carved wood, blackened walls, and altered internal arrangements. Once the residence of a Cardinal, the fine house was now divided among common occupants. Its architecture dated from the eras of Henry III, Henry IV, and Louis XIII; an old man recalled it once being called the hôtel Duperron, suggesting the Cardinal of that name might have built or lived in it.

A perron of several outer steps still marks the courtyard entrance, and a similar flight leads to the garden. Despite dilapidation, the balustrade and entrance porch show the luxury the architect lavished, perhaps to commemorate the owner’s name, a sculptured pun often indulged in by ancestors. Archaeologists can still detect traces of the cords of the Roman hat in medallions on the main front.

M. le Marquis d’Espard lived on the ground floor, probably to enjoy the garden, which was relatively spacious for the neighborhood and open for his children’s health. The steep street’s situation kept the ground-floor rooms dry. He took them, doubtless at a moderate price—rents being low when he settled there to be near the schools and supervise his boys’ education. The place’s dilapidated state had induced the owner to be accommodating, allowing the Marquis to expend on suitable furnishings without being accused of extravagance. The rooms retained lofty proportions and vestiges of paneling and decorated ceilings, displaying a dignity imparted by the prelacy evident in any surviving relic of the period.

The Marquis had the rooms painted in the rich brown tones favored by the Dutch and Old Paris citizens, panels hung with plain paper to match, inexpensive curtains chosen for effect, and judicious, sparing furniture. The overall impression was one of sweet peacefulness: calm, unpretentious unity of color, neatness. A certain nobility in details, the exquisite cleanliness of the furniture, and a concord of men and things made the word “suavity” come to mind.

Few were admitted to the rooms used by the Marquis and his two sons. In a wing toward the street, on the third floor, three large rooms remained in the grotesque bareness left by the printing works. These were devoted to the production of his Picturesque History of China: a writing-room, a depository, and a private room where the Marquis sat much of the day. After breakfast until four in the afternoon he worked on this publication; visitors commonly found him there and sometimes his sons returned to that floor. Thus the ground-floor rooms formed a sanctuary where father and sons spent evenings, and his domestic life was kept carefully private.

His only servants were a cook—an old woman long attached to the family—and a man-servant of forty who had been with him since his marriage to Mademoiselle de Blamont. The children’s nurse remained as well. The apartment bore witness to the minute care and maternal affection the nurse devoted to the household and the children. These three grave, uncommunicative retainers seemed to share the Marquis’s domestic plan. Their contrast with typical servants cast an air of mystery over the house and encouraged the calumny to which M. d’Espard himself gave occasion. He had resolved never to be on visiting terms with other tenants, partly to keep his boys from contact with strangers and perhaps to avoid intrusion.

In a man of his rank, in a Quartier Latin distracted by Liberalism, such conduct was sure to provoke petty passions and malicious gossip—the outcome of porters’ tongues and door-to-door tittle-tattle, all unknown to the Marquis and his household. His man-servant was branded a Jesuit, his cook a sly fox; the nurse was accused of collusion with Madame Jeanrenaud to rob the supposed madman. Gradually the tenants construed many ordinary things as proofs of madness, judging them without seeking reasonable motives.

Disbelieving in the History of China’s success, the tenants persuaded the landlord that M. d’Espard had no money just when, by the forgetfulness common to busy men, he had let the tax-collector send a summons for unpaid arrears. The landlord promptly demanded his quarter’s rent from January 1, sending in a receipt which the portress detained. On the 15th a summons to pay was served; delivered at her leisure, it seemed a misunderstanding to the Marquis, who had lived in the house twelve years without conceiving ill will from his host. He was actually seized by a bailiff at a moment his man-servant had gone to carry the rent money to the landlord.

This arrest, assiduously reported to those negotiating with him for his undertaking, alarmed some already doubtful of his solvency because of rumours that Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother were receiving large sums from him. These suspicions had some ground in the Marquis’s extreme economy in housekeeping: he ran his household like a ruined man. His servants always paid cash for trifling necessities, acting as if they preferred not to take credit; had they asked, they might have been refused, so rampant was the gossip. Tradesmen, capricious in whom they favor, often display such inconsistencies: they grant facilities to flatterers and stingy treatment to those they resent. Thus the Marquis’s habits and those of his children easily provoked ill-feeling and fed the malice of neighbors ready to believe any meanness to harm a man they had themselves set apart.

M. d’Espard was a gentleman, as his wife was a lady, by birth and breeding—types already rare in France. These characters rest on primitive ideas: belief in pure blood, a sense of natural superiority, an upbringing that never meets equals and so inculcates command. Such ideas, once innate, had been undermined over forty years by chance honors, the abolition of entail, and social changes that allowed formerly non-noble men to be ennobled by glory or riches. The breaking up of estates forced nobles to engage in commerce and personal toil: a new era.

Regarded as a relic of feudalism, M. d’Espard deserved respectful admiration. If he believed himself by birth superior, he also believed in nobility’s obligations and embodied its virtues and strength. He had raised his children in these principles, instilling from infancy the religion of their caste. A deep sense of dignity, pride of name, and conviction of birth-right gave them a knightly courage and baronial protectiveness. Their manners, shaped by these notions, offended the world of the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviève—a world, above all, of equality—where everyone believed M. d’Espard ruined and where people, from the lowest to the highest, refused noble privileges to a poor noble while readily conceding them to enriched bourgeois usurpers. Thus the family’s lack of communion with neighbors was as much moral as physical.

In father and sons alike, personality matched inner spirit. M. d’Espard, about fifty, might have served as a model of aristocratic birth in the nineteenth century. Slight and fair, his face suggested distinction and lofty sentiments but bore a deliberate coldness that commanded respect perhaps too decidedly. His aquiline nose bent slightly at the tip; his blue eyes and high forehead, prominent at the brows, indicated rectitude, perseverance, and perfect loyalty, while giving a singular look to his countenance. That prominent forehead hinted at a trace of madness; his thick, knitted eyebrows added apparent eccentricity. He had white well-kept hands and a high narrow foot. His speech was hesitant—a stammer and a halting expression of ideas that made him seem to “come and go,” feel his way, try everything and finish nothing. This surface defect contrasted with the decisiveness of his firmly-set mouth and a strongly marked physiognomy. His jerky gait matched his speech. These peculiarities helped confirm suspicions of insanity. Despite elegant appearance, he was systematically parsimonious in personal expenses, wearing the same black frock-coat for years, carefully brushed by his old man-servant.

The children were handsome, with a grace that did not exclude aristocratic disdain. Their coloring was bright, eyes clear, complexion transparent—signs of regular life and proper balance of work and play. Both had black hair, blue eyes, and a nose twist like their father’s; perhaps their mother contributed the dignity of look and speech characteristic of the Blamont-Chauvrys. Their voices, as clear as crystal, had a seductive emotional softness; they combined modesty with pride, a chaste reserve and touch-me-not quality that invited curiosity. The elder, Comte Clément de Négrepelisse, was nearly sixteen. Two years earlier he had given up the pretty English round jacket his brother Camille still wore. The Count, off from the Collège Henri IV for six months, dressed as a young man newly enjoying fashion. His father did not wish to condemn him to a year’s idle study of philosophy; instead he sought to give him consistent learning: transcendental mathematics, Eastern languages, the international law of Europe, heraldry, and history from original sources, charters, and edicts. Camille had lately begun the study of rhetoric.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
The day Popinot arranged to question M. d’Espard was a Thursday holiday. About nine, before their father awoke, the two brothers were playing in the garden. Clément, reluctant, was persuaded by his eager brother to support his request to the Marquis to go to the shooting-gallery. The Viscount took advantage of his brother’s weakness; they wrestled and quarrelled like schoolboys. Running and making so much noise they woke their father, who watched unnoticed from a window. The Marquis, amused, looked on as the boys tumbled and seized each other; the sight gave him a moment of happiness that repaid his anxieties. Two other persons on different floors also looked out, remarking that the old madman amused himself by making his children fight. Heads soon appeared at the windows; noticing them, the Marquis called, the boys climbed to the window and jumped into his room, and Clément obtained the permission Camille had sought.

All through the house people spoke of the Marquis’ new form of insanity. When Popinot arrived about twelve with his clerk, the porter’s wife, who had heard the gossip, conducted him to the third floor and recited the Marquise’s story—how that very morning M. d’Espard had set his children to fight and laughed when the younger bit the elder till he bled. She added, “Don’t ask me why; he doesn’t show himself!”

On the landing a door plastered with notices for the Picturesque History of China faced them. The muddy floor, dirty banisters, stained door, dilapidated window, a ceiling daubed with apprentices’ drawings, and piles of paper all matched the Marquise’s account and persuaded the judge despite himself.

“There you are, gentlemen,” said the porter’s wife; “there is the manufactory, where the Chinese swallow up enough to feed the whole neighborhood.”

They entered an outer room where an old man, the shopman, presided amid long shelves of published numbers. A wooden partition with a grating and green curtains formed a private office and a till marked the cash-desk. The shopman opened the next room. There, seated at a desk, was a venerable white-headed man, simply dressed, wearing the Cross of Saint-Louis. The room, an unpretentious office, had books, proof-sheets, and a black wood table.

“Monsieur le Marquis?” said Popinot.

“No, monsieur,” the old man replied, rising and showing gentlemanly manners. He went into the furthest room where the Marquis sat by the fire reading a newspaper.

The Marquis’ inner room had a shabby carpet, gray holland curtains, a few mahogany chairs, two armchairs, a desk with a revolving front, and an ordinary table. The old man led Popinot and his registrar, pulled forward chairs as if master, and M. d’Espard left it to him. After the preliminary civilities, Popinot stated the object of the visit: he was a judge charged by the President to examine the Marquis on a petition for a Commission in Lunacy by the Marquise d’Espard.

The old man withdrew; the clerk shut the door and sat to take notes. At the painful statement the Marquis, usually pale, turned scarlet with anger; he trembled, sat, and looked down. Then recovering his dignity, he looked at the judge steadily.

“How is it, monsieur,” he asked, “that I have had no notice of such a petition?”

“Monsieur le Marquis, persons on whom such a commission is held are not supposed to have the use of their reason; notice of the petition is unnecessary. The Court’s duty is to verify the petitioner’s allegations.”

“Nothing can be fairer,” replied the Marquis. “Well then, monsieur, tell me what I ought to do—”

“You have only to answer my questions, omitting nothing. However delicate the reasons for your conduct, speak without fear. In such cases the profoundest secrecy is observed.”

“Monsieur,” said the Marquis, pain showing, “if my explanations should lead to blame being attached to Madame d’Espard, what will be the result?”

“The Court may add its censure to its reasons for its decision.”

“Is such censure optional? If I were to stipulate, before replying, that nothing should be said to annoy Madame d’Espard should your report favor me, would the Court consider my request?”

The judge and the Marquis exchanged sentiments of mutual magnanimity. Popinot sent Noel, his registrar, into the other room, saying he would call if needed. “If, as I suspect,” he added, “I find a misunderstanding here, I can promise you the Court will act with due courtesy.”

After a pause Popinot raised the leading fact in Madame d’Espard’s petition: the dissipation of the Marquis’ fortune to the advantage of Madame Jeanrenaud, widow of a bargemaster, or rather to her son, Colonel Jeanrenaud, for whom the Marquis was said to have procured an appointment, exhausted his influence with the King, extended protection, and secured a marriage—allegations suggesting a passion discreditable even morally.

A crimson flush and tears sprang to the Marquis’ eyes, but pride suppressed them. He spoke in a broken voice, explaining the dilemma: to tell the truth would be to disclose secret wounds, place the honor of his family in the judge’s hands, and speak of himself—delicate matters. He hoped it would remain private and that legal means could allow judgment without betrayal of confidences. Popinot assured him this was possible.

The Marquis then told his story. After his marriage his wife’s expenses forced him to borrow. He described the position of noble families during the Revolution and the dispersal of title-deeds his father had brought to Paris from Languedoc, Provence, and Le Comtat for safety. Their family name was Negrepelisse; d’Espard was a title acquired in Henri IV’s time. At that alliance they lost Negrepelisse, once famed during religious struggles. Captain de Negrepelisse had been ruined by the burning of his property; the Crown had been unjust in recompense.

The Marquis’ great-grandfather had been left with entailed estates burdened with a jointure; though in favor at court, he was financially strained but prospered by the King’s goodwill. However, the Marquis had discovered a blot on the escutcheon: during the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes lands had been seized from Protestants, and his grandfather had gained the estates of Negrepelisse and Gravenges through documents tainted with iniquity. The owner, a merchant, had been arrested and hanged; the ransom money had been kept. The victim’s family were named Jeanrenaud.

This secret disgrace tormented the Marquis. He could not bear that his children should think of him as he thought of his father and ancestors. Determined to wipe out the stain, he wrote to Switzerland, traced the Protestant heirs, and discovered M. Jeanrenaud, lieutenant in a cavalry regiment under Napoleon, the sole heir. The Jeanrenauds insisted on no more than the lands’ value at the time the King bestowed them—eleven hundred thousand francs, payable at the Marquis’ convenience without interest. To pay this he had to forego his income for a long time.

The payments revealed his wife’s character. When he proposed they leave Paris and live on half her income to pay restitution faster, Madame d’Espard treated him as mad. Terrified by her coldness and little affection for their children, whom she abandoned to him, he resolved to leave her control of her fortune after paying common debts. Lacking funds for his sons’ education, he invested to pay off the obligation sooner. By taking advantage of price improvements, he recently repaid the whole eleven hundred thousand francs due. He had ensured his children did not suffer and had provided for their education and pleasures: fencing, horses, theatre, masters, canvases, books. Thus, he asserted, the payments to Madame Jeanrenaud and her son were motives of the most sacred and honorable kind.

“So Madame d’Espard knew the motives of your retirement?” asked the judge.

“Yes, monsieur.”

Popinot gave an expressive shrug, rose, and opened the door into the next room. He dismissed Noel. The Marquis declined to discuss his business in the presence of an old family friend, the Comte de Nouvion, partner in the publishing venture producing the History of China. The Marquis had taken rooms for the office of this undertaking; his apartment was elsewhere. In the ground-floor rooms the weather, sunshine, and air from the garden impressed Popinot; the scene seemed beyond what a madman would invent.

The Marquis explained the China project: the Comte de Nouvion, an emigrant returned without fortune, was his partner mainly for comfort. The Abbé Grozier, Keeper of the Books at the Arsenal, had taught him China; at twenty-five he knew Chinese and admired the nation’s antiquity, stable institutions, monumental works, administrative perfection, and industry. Yet he remained a French gentleman. The work had two thousand five hundred subscribers, twelve hundred in France; it was literary, iconographical, statistical, and religious, costing about three hundred francs per copy. The Comte would derive six to seven thousand francs a year for comfort; the Marquis expected to make about a hundred thousand francs to provide pleasures for his boys. His twelve years in retirement had left him forgotten at court, but he had pursued the nobler aim of purifying his family’s past and securing his sons’ future, even at the cost of personal ambition.

At that instant the tramp of horses was heard. The two lads, fashionably but plainly dressed, came in, booted and spurred, beaming and healthy. They grasped their father’s hand and affectionately looked at him, then bowed coldly to the lawyer. Popinot found no need to question relations with the sons. Camille boasted of knocking down six dolls at the shooting-gallery; when asked where they had ridden, they said to the Bois and that they had seen their mother. Clément, in an undertone, suggested their mother did not care to speak to them in public; they were “a little too big.” The judge caught the words; they clouded the Marquis’ brow. Popinot took pleasure in the picture of father and boys; the Marquis’ face and manner expressed nobility of character.

“You see,” said the Marquis, hesitating, “Justice may look in here at any time. If there is anybody crazy, it can only be the children—crazy about their father—and the father who is very crazy about his children—but that sort of madness rings true.”

At that moment Madame Jeanrenaud bustled into the ante-room despite the man-servant’s remonstrances. “I take no roundabout ways!” she exclaimed. “Yes, Monsieur le Marquis, I want to speak to you this very minute. By George, I am too late as it is, since Monsieur the criminal Judge is before me.”

“A criminal!” cried the two boys.

“Good reason why I did not find you at your own house, since you are here. Well, well! the Law is always to the fore when there is mischief brewing.—I came, Monsieur le Marquis, to tell you that my son and I are of one mind to give you everything back, since our honor is threatened. We would rather give you back everything than cause you the smallest trouble. They must be as stupid as pans without handles to call you a lunatic—”

“Silence, madame,” said Popinot.

“Children, leave us,” said the Marquis, and the boys, alarmed, went into the garden.

“Madame,” Popinot said, “the moneys paid to you by Monsieur le Marquis were legally due, though given in virtue of a very far-reaching theory of honesty. If all possessed of confiscated goods were compelled to restitution every hundred and fifty years, few legitimate owners would remain. Our law allows M. d’Espard to dispose of his income without accounting; a Commission in Lunacy is only granted when actions lack reason. Here the remittances to you have a reason based on the most sacred motives. Hence you may keep it without remorse and let the world misinterpret a noble action. In Paris the highest virtue is often slandered. Given present society, I must look upon M. d’Espard as a man to be crowned rather than interdicted.”

Popinot’s praise touched the Marquis. Madame Jeanrenaud, moved, thanked him warmly. The Marquis held out his hand; Popinot pressed it with sympathetic comprehension. Two natures—one plain but divinely kind, the other lofty and sublime—had met harmoniously. Popinot declared he had considered his clerk unnecessary from the start. He then, close to M. d’Espard in the window-bay, advised him to return home at once to counteract whatever influence had dictated the Marquise’s petition.

Popinot withdrew, touched by the scene. It was one he would recall in sorrowful hours. He thought the rooms would suit him; if the Marquis left them, he would take the lease.

The next day Popinot, having written his report, went to the Palais de Justice intending prompt action. In the robing-room the usher informed him the President begged his attendance in private. The President told him the Keeper of the Seals had mentioned that Popinot had been to tea with Madame d’Espard and suggested it would be better he not sit on the case. Popinot protested he left when tea was brought in. The President replied that although Popinot’s integrity was unquestioned, appearances mattered—“Caesar’s wife must not be suspected.” Journalism could misrepresent the Court, and the dignity of the Bench forbade reply. He had spoken to the President; M. Camusot had been appointed in Popinot’s place upon his retirement, which the President asked Popinot to signify as a personal favor. To compensate, the President promised him the Cross of the Legion of Honor. Popinot, recognizing the precariousness of reputations and the value of the Bench’s immunity to scandal, bowed and withdrew; he scorned to deny the accusation.

PARIS, February 1836.

ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Note: The Commission in Lunacy is also known as The Interdiction and is referred to by that title in certain of the addendums.

- Bianchon, Horace
  - Father Goriot
  - The Atheist’s Mass
  - César Birotteau
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - The Secrets of a Princess
  - The Government Clerks
  - Pierrette
  - A Study of Woman
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Honorine
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - The Magic Skin
  - A Second Home
  - A Prince of Bohemia
  - Letters of Two Brides
  - The Muse of the Department
  - The Imaginary Mistress
  - The Middle Classes
  - Cousin Betty
  - The Country Parson
  In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:
  - Another Study of Woman
  - La Grande Bretèche

- Bordin
  - The Gondreville Mystery
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - Jealousies of a Country Town

- Camusot de Marville
  - Cousin Pons
  - Jealousies of a Country Town
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

- Desroches (son)
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - Colonel Chabert
  - A Start in Life
  - A Woman of Thirty
  - The Government Clerks
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - The Firm of Nucingen
  - A Man of Business
  - The Middle Classes

- Espard, Charles-Maurice-Marie-Andoche, Comte de Négrepelisse, Marquis d’
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life

- Espard, Chevalier d’
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - The Secrets of a Princess

- Espard, Jeanne-Clémentine-Athénaïs de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d’
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Letters of Two Brides
  - Another Study of Woman
  - The Gondreville Mystery
  - The Secrets of a Princess
  - A Daughter of Eve
  - Béatrix

- Godeschal, François-Claude-Marie
  - Colonel Chabert
  - A Bachelor’s Establishment
  - A Start in Life
  - The Middle Classes
  - Cousin Pons

- Grozier, Abbé
  - Lost Illusions

- Jeanrenaud
  - Albert Savarus

- Mongenod, Frédéric
  - The Seamy Side of History

- Négrepelisse, De
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

- Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de
  - Father Goriot
  - The Thirteen
  - Eugénie Grandet
  - César Birotteau
  - Melmoth Reconciled
  - Lost Illusions
  - A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
  - Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
  - Modeste Mignon
  - The Firm of Nucingen
  - Another Study of Woman
  - A Daughter of Eve
  - The Member for Arcis

- Popinot, Jean-Jules
  - César Birotteau
  - Honorine
  - The Seamy Side of History
  - The Middle Classes

- Rabourdin, Madame
  - The Government Clerks

End of Project Gutenberg’s The Commission in Lunacy, by Honoré de Balzac
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY — central divider ############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################
This is the middle of the story.
################################################
############# MIDDLE OF THE STORY. #############
################################################